 
BSR W1V1  © 2023 Nutritional Therapy Association, Inc. ® All Rights Reserved.  
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 1, Video 1  
 
Title Slide  1  
 
Slide 2   
  
Blood sugar regulation is a vitally important factor that influences human health. Blood sugar, 
which is referred to as glucose, is the body’s preferred and primary source of fuel that provides energy to the various systems of the human body. The term “preferred” is used here because glucose, compared to our other fuel sources like fatty acids and proteins, i s the most readily 
converted into energy in the mitochondria, whereas it requires more steps to convert proteins and fats into energy. It is also called “preferred” because if all three types of fuel are available, the body will tend to use glucose first, or preferentially. So, glucose is a truly amazing thing and is the building block and essential energy unit of so much life on earth, but as you likely know, we also get some serious complications when the supply and utilization of glucose are out of 
balan ce in the body.   
  
As we will learn in the upcoming weeks, blood sugar dysregulation can be closely associated 
with other common health concerns such as cardiovascular disease, and immune and endocrine 
dysregulation.    
  
The escalating health crisis of type 2 diabetes brings with it much concern as it is not only one  
of the top 10 leading causes  of death in the United States and commonly contributes to various 
other conditions, but it also creates a major economic burden. In 2017, 1 in 4 healthcare dollars was spent, and a total estimated cost of 327 billion dollars can be attributed to cases of diagnosed diabetes. Diabetes now accounts for the majority of Medicare spending, which makes up a large portion of all government spending.  
  
The great news is that working with clients to balance blood sugar regulation is something that 
Nutritional Therapy practitioners excel at. This is an exciting foundation to work with because we have so many diet and lifestyle resources to leverage, client s are often able to feel and 
measure concrete changes in their health as they improve their blood sugar regulation, and doing so can lead to so many diverse health benefits and improved quality of life.    
 
BSR W1V1  © 2023 Nutritional Therapy Association, Inc. ® All Rights Reserved.  
  
Before we get into blood sugar regulation within the body, let’s start by establishing a basic 
understanding of carbohydrates in general.    
 
Slide 3   
  
First, let’s break down our key terms. As you know, carbohydrates are one of the three main macronutrients, along with proteins and fats. They are called carbohydrates because they are made from carbon, hydrogen, and a little bit of oxygen. Carbohydrates are classified according to the number o f sugar units, also called saccharides, that they contain. As you learned in the 
digestion module in our discussion of prebiotics, carbohydrates also differ in the types of bonds 
that hold the sugars together in their chains, called glycosidic linkages, wh ich determine how 
easy or difficult they are for us to break down.    
   
We have two main categories:   
 
• Simple Carbohydrates: These are composed of one or two sugar molecules. 
There are two types of simple carbohydrates and their names will tell you about 
their structure; monosaccharides which have a single sugar or saccharide  molecule, 
and disaccharides which have two. There are three types of monosaccharides which we will discuss in a moment, but for now, know that these single sugars will be strung together in various combinations to serve as the building blocks of all the other carbohydrates we find in nature. As we will see, glucose is one of the most 
common forms of monosaccharides in our diets and our bodies.    
 
• Complex Carbohydrates: These are composed of long chains of sugar molecules, 
also known as oligosaccharides, which contain three to ten sugar units, and polysaccharides which contain over ten sugar units.   
  
Let’s look at each of these groups in greater detail.   
  
Slide 4   
 
The three primary types of monosaccharides include glucose, fructose, and galactose.   
  
• Glucose - While glucose serves as the primary sugar in many complex carbs like 
starch where long branches of glucose are found to bond together, it can also be found in its free form in fruits and some sweeteners like honey, agave, and corn syrup. Most foo ds contain larger sugar molecules that are eventually broken down 
into glucose. In this module, we will be exploring the pathways by which the body 
converts other substances into glucose to then be used as energy.    
 
BSR W1V1  © 2023 Nutritional Therapy Association, Inc. ® All Rights Reserved.  
 
• Fructose is found in fruits, vegetables, and honey, but it is important to 
understand that all of these sources will have a combination of different types of 
monosaccharides and many of them have a mix of glucose and fructose, like honey, which can have anywhere between 21 -43% fructose and around 30% glucose. 
Fructose is the sweetest of simple sugars and is absorbed less efficiently than glucose. As we will learn later, when consumed in high amounts, as in high fructose corn syrup, it can impose an outsized  burden on the body in terms of liver 
metabolism and glycation of proteins in the body.    
 
• Galactose is not found free in food but is released through the digestion of milk 
sugar known as lactose. It is then converted to glucose in the liver.    
  
Slide 5    
 Disaccharides include sucrose, lactose, and maltose.    
 
• Sucrose is another name for table sugar, and it is composed of one glucose and 
one fructose. It is also found naturally in some fruits and vegetables. It is especially rich in beets and sugar cane, which is why these are the primary sources of table sugar.    
 
• Lactose is composed of one glucose and one galactose and is found in milk, 
cream, and other dairy products. When dairy undergoes bacterial fermentation, the 
lactose is split into glucose and galactose, and these monosaccharides are then 
converted into lactic acid and carbon dioxide, so well- fermented dairy can have very 
little lactose content.    
 
• Maltose is composed of two glucose and is found in cereal grains but is also 
formed in the digestive tract when starch is digested. The partial breakdown of grains can produce malt products that are used as sweeteners like malt syrup and partially hydrolyz ed starch products like maltodextrin.    
  
Slide 6  
  
Now onto our complex carbohydrates. We learned about several types of oligosaccharides in our section on prebiotics. They are complex carbohydrates with 3 to 10 sugar units, and examples include fructooligosaccharides and galactooligosaccharides. They are commonly found in legumes, bananas, artichokes, and other root vegetables, which are also known as 
high -FODMAP  foods. They can also be formed in the digestive tract due to polysaccharide 
 
BSR W1V1  © 2023 Nutritional Therapy Association, Inc. ® All Rights Reserved.  
breakdown. Some oligosaccharides cannot be digested by humans and therefore act as 
prebiotics.    
  
Polysaccharides are made up of many single sugar units and include starch, fiber, and glycogen. Let’s take a closer look at each of these.    
  
Slide 7  
  
Starch is composed entirely of glucose molecules bound together into chains. There are two types; amylose – a long single chain of glucose molecules, and amylopectin, which looks like a 
branch with multiple chains of glucose connecting.    
  
Some starch is resistant to breaking  down which allows it to serve as a prebiotic. This type of 
starch is known as resistant starch and can be found in foods such as unripe, green bananas, legumes, boiled and cooled potatoes , and rice.    
  
In their whole food forms, starchy grains, tubers, and vegetables will also contain fiber, which will slow the breakdown of the starch into glucose.    
  
Fiber includes the parts of plant foods that the human body cannot digest or absorb. Rather it  
passes through the digestive tract and out of the body, providing numerous health benefits along the way.    
  
Fiber is classified as either soluble or insoluble, and as we learned in digestion, they can both 
help to improve bowel regularity and support a healthy microbiome. They also support healthy 
blood sugar. Whereas starch is made of all glucose molecules link ed together, fiber can contain 
many different types of molecules, not just our three main monosaccharides. That said, some fibers are also made of glucose, like cellulose, found in all plant cell walls. Unlike starch which does eventually turn into free gl ucose, we are not able to break the glycosidic bonds in fiber to 
release the glucose, so it does not contribute to our blood glucose levels.    
  
Finally, glycogen. Glycogen is the stored form of glucose in humans and animals. It is mainly present in the tissue of muscles and the liver. The glycogen found in the muscle tissue of animals is converted to lactic acid when animals are slaughtered for me at. The purpose of 
glycogen is to be a quick -access storage form of energy that can be quickly turned into glucose 
when needed. It helps to maintain blood glucose levels during exercise, or short fasting windows such as sleeping or between meals. We will t alk more about glycogen’s role in our 
blood sugar regulation in a future video.   
  
  
 
BSR W1V1  © 2023 Nutritional Therapy Association, Inc. ® All Rights Reserved.  
Slide 8  
  
We reviewed the breakdown of carbohydrates in the digestion module, but let’s just review the 
key points again here.    
  
Monosaccharides including glucose, fructose, and galactose will not need any mechanical or 
enzymatic action to be absorbed across the small intestine.    
  
The digestion of complex carbohydrates and starch in particular begins in the mouth with mechanical breakdown through chewing and salivary amylase. Once the starch reaches the 
stomach, amylase is inactivated due to the acidic environment, but stomach contractions help 
with the mechanical breakdown of carbohydrates.   
  
Once in the small intestine, pancreatic amylase and brush border enzymes assist in breaking down the glycosidic bonds within the remaining disaccharides and digestible oligosaccharides into monosaccharides.    
  
Disaccharides require specific enzymes to be broken down into monosaccharides for absorption. These enzymes are named after the disaccharides they split: sucrases, lactases, and maltases , and are produced in the brush border or microvilli of the small intestinal wall.    
  
Since disaccharides only require small amounts  of enzyme activity to break their single bonds, 
the component monosaccharides are quickly released and absorbed into the bloodstream.   
  
Any remaining carbohydrates that were not turned into monosaccharides and absorbed –  
primarily poly and oligo saccharides like resistant starch, FODMAPS, and fiber, arrive in the large intestine where they are subject to metabolism by our intestinal microb iome.    
  
Slide 9  
  
Now that our monosaccharides have been absorbed, where do they go? The majority will be 
transported to the liver via the hepatic portal vein.    
  
Galactose is converted to glucose in the liver and either sent out into circulation or put into storage as glycogen or triglycerides. It is thought that some fructose may be converted to 
glucose in the intestines, but much of it will circulate in the bloodstream until the liver can convert it to glucose as well.    
  
As you can see, the liver has its work cut out for it –  converting galactose and fructose into 
glucose, and then working to pack glucose into storage forms and send it out into circulation - 
 
BSR W1V1  © 2023 Nutritional Therapy Association, Inc. ® All Rights Reserved.  
all while doing a great many other important jobs for us. We will come back to this topic of 
glucose metabolism in much great er detail soon.    
  
Slide 10  
  
Before we conclude this video, I want to look at how a few different types  of carbohydrates 
might show up in whole foods. As we mentioned, within whole foods, we will find several types of carbohydrates --similar to the way that we find a blend of saturated fats, polyunsaturated 
fats, and monounsaturated fats in whole food forms of dietary fats.    
  
Looking at a single cereal grain is a great way to understand the difference between whole food and refined carbohydrates. Here, we can see that we have an outer layer of bran that is rich in fiber and other vitamins and helps to slow down the release of g lucose from the starchy portion 
of the endosperm. We also see that there is a packet of fat- soluble nutrition in the center 
known as the germ that is rich in antioxidants and phytochemicals.    
  
Slide 11  
 Similarly, if we compare a whole apple to apple juice, we see that both are rich sources of monosaccharides like fructose, but in the whole apple, much of the simple sugars are contained with fibrous cell walls and matrixes that reduce the number of free s ugars we absorb and 
greatly slow down the absorption processes. Also, the whole apple will provide a multitude of fiber, including pectin, to our microbiome and help bulk stools and support bowel regularity, whereas the apple juice will not make it to the large intestine. Instead, it will be absorbed in the small intestine and will provide fuel to any microorganisms in the upper small intestine if they 
can get to it before it is absorbed.    
  
We will talk more about using measuring tools like the glycemic index and glycemic load to 
better understand the impact of specific foods on blood sugar regulation later in the module. For now, I hope this has given you a stronger understanding of the different types of carbohydrates and how we digest them. We will dedicate the next video to understanding how the liver and other key organs can store and utilize glucose, and then finally, we will discuss the hormonal systems that help regulate blood glucose levels.    
  
 
References   
 
1. American Diabetes Association. Economic costs of diabetes in the U.S. in 2017. 
Diabetes Care . 2018;41(5):917- 928. doi:https://doi.org/10.2337/dci18 -0007   
 
BSR W1V1  © 2023 Nutritional Therapy Association, Inc. ® All Rights Reserved.  
2. Bobiş O, Dezmirean DS, Moise AR. Honey and Diabetes: The Importance of 
Natural Simple Sugars in Diet for Preventing and Treating Different Type of Diabetes. 
Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity . 2018;2018:1- 12. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/4757893   
3. Hantzidiamantis PJ, Lappin SL. Physiology, Glucose. PubMed. Published 2023. 
Accessed November 21, 2023. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK545201/?report=classic   
4. Holesh JE, Martin A. Physiology, Carbohydrates. Nih.gov. Published 2019. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK459280/   
5. University of Hawai’i at Mānoa  Food Science, Human Nutrition Program. 
Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates. Hawaii.edu. Published 2017. http://pressbooks -dev.oer.hawaii.edu/humannutrition/chapter/digestion -and-
absorption -of-carbohydrates/   
 
