Blood Sugar Regulation  
Recorded Lecture Transcripts  
  
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 1, Video 1  
 
Title Slide  1  
 
Slide 2   
  
Blood sugar regulation is a vitally important factor that influences human health. Blood sugar, 
which is referred to as glucose, is the body’s preferred and primary source of fuel that provides energy to the various systems of the human body. The term “preferred” is used here because glucose, compared to our other fuel sources like fatty acids and proteins, i s the most readily 
converted into energy in the mitochondria, whereas it requires more steps to convert proteins and fats into energy. It is also called “preferred” because if all three types of fuel are available, the body will tend to use glucose first, or preferentially. So, glucose is a truly amazing thing and is the building block and essential energy unit of so much life on earth, but as you likely know, we also get some serious complications when the supply and utilization of glucose are out of 
balan ce in the body.   
  
As we will learn in the upcoming weeks, blood sugar dysregulation can be closely associated 
with other common health concerns such as cardiovascular disease, and immune and endocrine 
dysregulation.    
  
The escalating health crisis of type 2 diabetes brings with it much concern as it is not only one  
of the top 10 leading causes  of death in the United States and commonly contributes to various 
other conditions, but it also creates a major economic burden. In 2017, 1 in 4 healthcare dollars was spent, and a total estimated cost of 327 billion dollars can be attributed to cases of diagnosed diabetes. Diabetes now accounts for the majority of Medicare spending, which makes up a large portion of all government spending.  
  
The great news is that working with clients to balance blood sugar regulation is something that 
Nutritional Therapy practitioners excel at. This is an exciting foundation to work with because we have so many diet and lifestyle resources to leverage, client s are often able to feel and 
measure concrete changes in their health as they improve their blood sugar regulation, and doing so can lead to so many diverse health benefits and improved quality of life.    
 
  
Before we get into blood sugar regulation within the body, let’s start by establishing a basic 
understanding of carbohydrates in general.    
 
Slide 3   
  
First, let’s break down our key terms. As you know, carbohydrates are one of the three main macronutrients, along with proteins and fats. They are called carbohydrates because they are made from carbon, hydrogen, and a little bit of oxygen. Carbohydrates are classified according to the number o f sugar units, also called saccharides, that they contain. As you learned in the 
digestion module in our discussion of prebiotics, carbohydrates also differ in the types of bonds 
that hold the sugars together in their chains, called glycosidic linkages, wh ich determine how 
easy or difficult they are for us to break down.    
   
We have two main categories:   
 
• Simple Carbohydrates: These are composed of one or two sugar molecules. 
There are two types of simple carbohydrates and their names will tell you about 
their structure; monosaccharides which have a single sugar or saccharide  molecule, 
and disaccharides which have two. There are three types of monosaccharides which we will discuss in a moment, but for now, know that these single sugars will be strung together in various combinations to serve as the building blocks of all the other carbohydrates we find in nature. As we will see, glucose is one of the most 
common forms of monosaccharides in our diets and our bodies.    
 
• Complex Carbohydrates: These are composed of long chains of sugar molecules, 
also known as oligosaccharides, which contain three to ten sugar units, and polysaccharides which contain over ten sugar units.   
  
Let’s look at each of these groups in greater detail.   
  
Slide 4   
 
The three primary types of monosaccharides include glucose, fructose, and galactose.   
  
• Glucose - While glucose serves as the primary sugar in many complex carbs like 
starch where long branches of glucose are found to bond together, it can also be found in its free form in fruits and some sweeteners like honey, agave, and corn syrup. Most foo ds contain larger sugar molecules that are eventually broken down 
into glucose. In this module, we will be exploring the pathways by which the body 
converts other substances into glucose to then be used as energy.    
 
 
• Fructose is found in fruits, vegetables, and honey, but it is important to 
understand that all of these sources will have a combination of different types of 
monosaccharides and many of them have a mix of glucose and fructose, like honey, which can have anywhere between 21 -43% fructose and around 30% glucose. 
Fructose is the sweetest of simple sugars and is absorbed less efficiently than glucose. As we will learn later, when consumed in high amounts, as in high fructose corn syrup, it can impose an outsized  burden on the body in terms of liver 
metabolism and glycation of proteins in the body.    
 
• Galactose is not found free in food but is released through the digestion of milk 
sugar known as lactose. It is then converted to glucose in the liver.    
  
Slide 5    
 Disaccharides include sucrose, lactose, and maltose.    
 
• Sucrose is another name for table sugar, and it is composed of one glucose and 
one fructose. It is also found naturally in some fruits and vegetables. It is especially rich in beets and sugar cane, which is why these are the primary sources of table sugar.    
 
• Lactose is composed of one glucose and one galactose and is found in milk, 
cream, and other dairy products. When dairy undergoes bacterial fermentation, the 
lactose is split into glucose and galactose, and these monosaccharides are then 
converted into lactic acid and carbon dioxide, so well- fermented dairy can have very 
little lactose content.    
 
• Maltose is composed of two glucose and is found in cereal grains but is also 
formed in the digestive tract when starch is digested. The partial breakdown of grains can produce malt products that are used as sweeteners like malt syrup and partially hydrolyz ed starch products like maltodextrin.    
  
Slide 6  
  
Now onto our complex carbohydrates. We learned about several types of oligosaccharides in our section on prebiotics. They are complex carbohydrates with 3 to 10 sugar units, and examples include fructooligosaccharides and galactooligosaccharides. They are commonly found in legumes, bananas, artichokes, and other root vegetables, which are also known as 
high -FODMAP  foods. They can also be formed in the digestive tract due to polysaccharide 
 
breakdown. Some oligosaccharides cannot be digested by humans and therefore act as 
prebiotics.    
  
Polysaccharides are made up of many single sugar units and include starch, fiber, and glycogen. Let’s take a closer look at each of these.    
  
Slide 7  
  
Starch is composed entirely of glucose molecules bound together into chains. There are two types; amylose – a long single chain of glucose molecules, and amylopectin, which looks like a 
branch with multiple chains of glucose connecting.    
  
Some starch is resistant to breaking  down which allows it to serve as a prebiotic. This type of 
starch is known as resistant starch and can be found in foods such as unripe, green bananas, legumes, boiled and cooled potatoes , and rice.    
  
In their whole food forms, starchy grains, tubers, and vegetables will also contain fiber, which will slow the breakdown of the starch into glucose.    
  
Fiber includes the parts of plant foods that the human body cannot digest or absorb. Rather it  
passes through the digestive tract and out of the body, providing numerous health benefits along the way.    
  
Fiber is classified as either soluble or insoluble, and as we learned in digestion, they can both 
help to improve bowel regularity and support a healthy microbiome. They also support healthy 
blood sugar. Whereas starch is made of all glucose molecules link ed together, fiber can contain 
many different types of molecules, not just our three main monosaccharides. That said, some fibers are also made of glucose, like cellulose, found in all plant cell walls. Unlike starch which does eventually turn into free gl ucose, we are not able to break the glycosidic bonds in fiber to 
release the glucose, so it does not contribute to our blood glucose levels.    
  
Finally, glycogen. Glycogen is the stored form of glucose in humans and animals. It is mainly present in the tissue of muscles and the liver. The glycogen found in the muscle tissue of animals is converted to lactic acid when animals are slaughtered for me at. The purpose of 
glycogen is to be a quick -access storage form of energy that can be quickly turned into glucose 
when needed. It helps to maintain blood glucose levels during exercise, or short fasting windows such as sleeping or between meals. We will t alk more about glycogen’s role in our 
blood sugar regulation in a future video.   
  
  
 
Slide 8  
  
We reviewed the breakdown of carbohydrates in the digestion module, but let’s just review the 
key points again here.    
  
Monosaccharides including glucose, fructose, and galactose will not need any mechanical or 
enzymatic action to be absorbed across the small intestine.    
  
The digestion of complex carbohydrates and starch in particular begins in the mouth with mechanical breakdown through chewing and salivary amylase. Once the starch reaches the 
stomach, amylase is inactivated due to the acidic environment, but stomach contractions help 
with the mechanical breakdown of carbohydrates.   
  
Once in the small intestine, pancreatic amylase and brush border enzymes assist in breaking down the glycosidic bonds within the remaining disaccharides and digestible oligosaccharides into monosaccharides.    
  
Disaccharides require specific enzymes to be broken down into monosaccharides for absorption. These enzymes are named after the disaccharides they split: sucrases, lactases, and maltases , and are produced in the brush border or microvilli of the small intestinal wall.    
  
Since disaccharides only require small amounts  of enzyme activity to break their single bonds, 
the component monosaccharides are quickly released and absorbed into the bloodstream.   
  
Any remaining carbohydrates that were not turned into monosaccharides and absorbed –  
primarily poly and oligo saccharides like resistant starch, FODMAPS, and fiber, arrive in the large intestine where they are subject to metabolism by our intestinal microb iome.    
  
Slide 9  
  
Now that our monosaccharides have been absorbed, where do they go? The majority will be 
transported to the liver via the hepatic portal vein.    
  
Galactose is converted to glucose in the liver and either sent out into circulation or put into storage as glycogen or triglycerides. It is thought that some fructose may be converted to 
glucose in the intestines, but much of it will circulate in the bloodstream until the liver can convert it to glucose as well.    
  
As you can see, the liver has its work cut out for it –  converting galactose and fructose into 
glucose, and then working to pack glucose into storage forms and send it out into circulation - 
 
all while doing a great many other important jobs for us. We will come back to this topic of 
glucose metabolism in much great er detail soon.    
  
Slide 10  
  
Before we conclude this video, I want to look at how a few different types  of carbohydrates 
might show up in whole foods. As we mentioned, within whole foods, we will find several types of carbohydrates --similar to the way that we find a blend of saturated fats, polyunsaturated 
fats, and monounsaturated fats in whole food forms of dietary fats.    
  
Looking at a single cereal grain is a great way to understand the difference between whole food and refined carbohydrates. Here, we can see that we have an outer layer of bran that is rich in fiber and other vitamins and helps to slow down the release of g lucose from the starchy portion 
of the endosperm. We also see that there is a packet of fat- soluble nutrition in the center 
known as the germ that is rich in antioxidants and phytochemicals.    
  
Slide 11  
 Similarly, if we compare a whole apple to apple juice, we see that both are rich sources of monosaccharides like fructose, but in the whole apple, much of the simple sugars are contained with fibrous cell walls and matrixes that reduce the number of free s ugars we absorb and 
greatly slow down the absorption processes. Also, the whole apple will provide a multitude of fiber, including pectin, to our microbiome and help bulk stools and support bowel regularity, whereas the apple juice will not make it to the large intestine. Instead, it will be absorbed in the small intestine and will provide fuel to any microorganisms in the upper small intestine if they 
can get to it before it is absorbed.    
  
We will talk more about using measuring tools like the glycemic index and glycemic load to 
better understand the impact of specific foods on blood sugar regulation later in the module. For now, I hope this has given you a stronger understanding of the different types of carbohydrates and how we digest them. We will dedicate the next video to understanding how the liver and other key organs can store and utilize glucose, and then finally, we will discuss the hormonal systems that help regulate blood glucose levels.    
  
 
References   
 
1. American Diabetes Association. Economic costs of diabetes in the U.S. in 2017. 
Diabetes Care . 2018;41(5):917- 928. doi:https://doi.org/10.2337/dci18 -0007   
 
2. Bobiş O, Dezmirean DS, Moise AR. Honey and Diabetes: The Importance of 
Natural Simple Sugars in Diet for Preventing and Treating Different Type of Diabetes. 
Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity . 2018;2018:1- 12. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/4757893   
3. Hantzidiamantis PJ, Lappin SL. Physiology, Glucose. PubMed. Published 2023. 
Accessed November 21, 2023. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK545201/?report=classic   
4. Holesh JE, Martin A. Physiology, Carbohydrates. Nih.gov. Published 2019. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK459280/   
5. University of Hawai’i at Mānoa  Food Science, Human Nutrition Program. 
Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates. Hawaii.edu. Published 2017. http://pressbooks -dev.oer.hawaii.edu/humannutrition/chapter/digestion -and-
absorption -of-carbohydrates/   
 
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 1, Video 2  
 
Title Slide 1   
 
In our last video, we left off with monosaccharides being absorbed through the small intestines and sent to the liver. Before we dive into how glucose levels, or blood sugar levels, are regulated in terms of hormonal signaling, let’s establish a few key concepts on how glucose can be metabolized into different forms, which enables us to balance storage and utilization. Thi s 
will help set the stage for our understanding of regulation.    
 
Slide 2   
  
When we think about glucose metabolism, we are thinking about the utilization, conversion, and storage of fuel to create and control biological energy. That is the heart of this story. Ultimately, we are hoping to get usable fuel to the mitochondria in our  cells to be converted 
into ATP. ATP is the biological energy unit we use to perform every job in the body, from contracting heart muscles, generating an electrical impulse in a brain neuron, producing hormones, or blinking our eyes. There are numerous met abolic pathways that the body can use 
to convert, utilize, and store fuel based on different demands, and this flexibility allows us to thrive in all sorts of different states and circumstances.    
  
If this is your first time  studying metabolism, I want to just assure you that you are not crazy if it 
feels confusing. Metabolism is a massive and complex topic, and it is a wonderfully fascinating topic. We are talking about the mind- blowing science of converting mass into living  energy! As 
such, there will be a lot of different pathways, organs, hormones, enzymes, and fancy 
terminology along the way. It takes some time and patience to map it all out –  but it is worth it 
and you are not alone!    
  
So, in simplest terms, we are thinking about fuel moving in two different directions:   
  
• Utilizing, converting, and storing fuel when supplies are high, which we could call 
a fed-state   
 
• Liberating stored fuel when supplies are low, which we could call a fasted state, 
but also occurs when certain macronutrient groups are restricted   
 
  
Slide 3   
  
The first pathway we use to metabolize glucose in our fed state is  glycolysis, which is the 
scientific name for the enzymatic breakdown of glucose to release ATP . When you hear “lysis” 
think of cutting –  so we are cutting the glucose molecule into smaller parts using enzyme s. 
Glycolysis takes place in the cell's cytoplasm and generates two pyruvate molecules by splitting 
the glucose.  During glycolysis , 2 ATP units are released, and the pyruvate molecules can then go 
through additional steps  of metabolism to  release  even more energy.   
  
If there is sufficient oxygen available in the cell, the pyruvate molecules will move into the 
mitochondria where they will undergo  cellular respiration. You might recall something about 
cellular respiration from an earlier biology class. It includes the citric acid cycle, also called the 
Krebs Cycle, and the electron transport chain. In mitochondria , the two pyruvate molecules  we 
made from splitting the glucose  are converted to acetyl -CoA whic h can enter  the citric acid 
cycle and electron transport chain to produce more ATP.  
 
These are complicated processes, and we will not cover each enzymatic step here.  The main 
goal is to understand that these metabolic processes are all pointing toward the same goal: we are continuing to pull apart the elements of the glucose molecule ( carbon, hydrogen, and 
oxygen ) from the original glucose molecule in a way that allows us to control the process 
without releasing too much or too little energy – like a finely tuned engine.    
   So, we are using two processes –  glycolysis breaks apart the glucose first, aerobic cellular 
respiration finishes the work. This is the quickest and easiest way for the body to produce that energy. We will see components of this process used again when we look at the metabolism of 
protein and fatty acids.  
 
Slide 4   
   Now let’s imagine for a moment that we’ve just had a meal rich in carbohydrates and there are ample amounts of glucose available for cells to uptake and send to the mitochondria to make cellular energy. There may be so much that we risk overloading the cel ls and vessels of the 
body, so the liver is going to want to find ways to store that excess glucose. It has two main ways to do this:   
  
1. Convert it to glycogen and store it in the liver or skeletal muscles –  a process 
known as glycogenesis. You can remember this by the root works glycogen and genesis or generation.   
 
 
2. Once our glycogen stores in the liver and skeletal muscles are nice and full, we 
can start to convert our excess glucose into fatty acids and triglycerides for storage 
in adipose tissue. This process is known as lipogenesis, and just like glycogenosis, its  
name tells you what it means –  lipo (lipid) genesis (generation).    
  
Slide 5   
  
You might be wondering how the body balances these two storage options. As we mentioned earlier, the primary storage site of glycogen is in the skeletal muscles ( ∼500 g) and the liver 
(∼100 g), which will vary depending on body size and composition. This means we have a 
maximum glycogen storage of about ~600g or so of glycogen. Each gram of glycogen provides 4 calories, which equates to a maximum of   2,400 calories in glycogen stores, and  many people 
would have much less than that. 2,400 calories represent a fairly limited storage capacity –  we 
could burn through that in just a day or two of fasting.   On the other hand, body fat can hold more than twice the calories per volume –  9 calories per 
gram, and we can expand our adipose tissue to accommodate larger energy reserves. So, when we are refueling after a fasting window or intense exercise, we tend to  refill our glycogen 
reserves first, and then start to contribute more to our fat stores via lipogenesis.   
  
Before we look at each of these storage options in more detail, I want to make a note of something interesting. The body can convert glucose into fatty acids, but that is a one -way 
street. As we will learn later, the body cannot convert fatty acids into gl ucose. It can, however, 
use a different pathway to produce energy from fatty acids.    
 
Slide 6   
   Glycogen is a branched chain of glucose molecules used to store glucose in animals –  similar to 
starch in plants. The liver can produce glycogen from dietary glucose, but also the conversion of 
our other two monosaccharides, galactose, and fructose.   
  
So, the process of creating glycogen for storage is glycogenesis, but what if we need to tap into 
our glycogen reserves when blood glucose levels decrease and energy is suddenly needed? This process is called glycogenolysis (cutting glycogen), and it occurs when an individual goes without food for several hours or burns through their immediate supply of blood glucose during a bout of physical activity. The release of glucose from glycogenolysis during fasted states is 
what allows us to keep a stable blood g lucose level between meals.   
  
Glycogenolysis is also a faster, more direct way to access stored fuel compared to tapping into 
our fat reserves, and it provides a more explosive energy so you will notice that high-performance athletes will work to make sure they have ample glycogen stor es before an event. 
 
Having plenty of glycogen will also prevent the body from breaking down structural proteins 
like a muscle to produce more glucose, so in this way, it is considered “muscle sparing.”    
  
Slide 7   
   Lipogenesis is the synthesis or production of new fatty acids and triglycerides (which are 
generally what we mean when we say “fats”) from non- fat sources, such as glucose or even 
amino acids. The process of lipogenesis occurs primarily in the liver and ad ipose tissue (body 
fat) when we have an abundance of fuel and need to store some.    
  
There are a few pathways by which this process of converting glucose or amino acids into lipid 
storage forms can happen, and they depend on factors like metabolic health, hormone levels, and energy balance, which we will discuss later.   
  
In general, the process of converting glucose into triglycerides primarily occurs in the liver, but it is not a mandatory step for glucose storage in adipose tissue. When blood glucose levels are high, the liver can also convert glucose into free fatty acids that are released into the bloodstream and taken up by cells in adipose tissue, or adipocytes, where they are reassembled into triglycerides for storage as body fat.   
  
Glucose can also be directly taken up by adipocytes without prior conversion into fatty acids in the liver. Adipose tissue can convert glucose into triglycerides through a process called de novo lipogenesis. This occurs within the adipose tissue itself, where glucose is transformed into fatty acids and subsequently assembled into triglycerides for storage.   
  
The chemical structure of fat allows the body to pack much more energy into a smaller space, so it is a good long -term storage op tion.    
  
Slide 8   
   So once we have generated fat storage, how and when do we use it?    
  
Lipolysis is the cutting or conversion of triglycerides in the adipose tissue into their constituent fatty acids and glycerol, which allows free fatty acids to be released back into the bloodstream. This process requires hormonal cues to help us activate lipase enzymes. Interestingly, one of the main hormones regulating lipolysis is insulin. Insulin blocks lipolysis, which is why we must 
first deplete blood glucose levels before we begin to tap into fat stores.    
  
Once fatty acids are released through lipolysis, we can send the fatty acids to the next 
metabolic pathway. In tissues like muscle and liver, the fatty acids are taken up by cells and undergo a series of chemical reactions called fatty acid beta -oxidation.  The process of lipolysis 
 
and beta -oxidation is similar to glycolysis in that it ultimately ends with energy -rich molecules 
entering the citric acid cycle and electron transport chain, but the enzymes and substrates are 
different.    
  
In beta -oxidation, fatty acids are broken down further to produce acetyl -CoA (rather than 
pyruvate as we saw in glycolysis), which then enters the citric acid cycle to release a few molecules of ATP and other energy -rich molecules, which then finally go on to the electron 
transport chain to be broken down even further and release even more energy, just as we saw with glycolysis.    
 
Slide 9   
  
The breakdown of fats through beta -oxidation provides more ATP per unit of fuel than sugars, 
but it requires more oxygen to produce an equivalent amount of ATP compared to glycolysis. So although fats produce a lot of energy, it takes longer to produce energy through lipolysis and fatty acid beta ox idation, and we need plenty of oxygen. The slower speed is partly due to the 
need to liberate the fatty acids from the triglyceride form first. And remember, as long as there are sufficiently high levels of glucose and insulin in the system, we will have a  hard time 
activating those lipase enzymes and accessing our stored fat.    
  
While we tend to start depleting our glycogen stores first in a fasted state or during exercise, glycogenolysis and lipolysis are not entirely mutually exclusive –  the body can draw from both 
reserves at the same time in a complementary way to help stabilize our energy levels. We will tend to draw on glycogen more if we are working in a fasted state, but we draw more on fatty acid stores when we are in a rested fasting state. This is because glycogen and glucose are fast -
acting  fuels, while fatty acids are longer -lasting  and slower fuels.    
  
Slide 10   
Now you may be wondering — where does ketosis fit into  all of  this?  
Lipolysis, f atty acid beta -oxidation, and ketosis are related but distinct processes.  
We just learned that lipolysis is the breakdown of triglycerides into free fatty acids, and fatty 
acid beta -oxidation is the step- by-step breakdown of fatty acids into acetyl -CoA. Those acetyl -
CoA molecules  can then enter the citric acid cycle and electron transport chain in the 
mitochondria to produce ATP  (aka, cellular respiration) . This process (that I just outlined) 
happens all the time, even if glucose is your main fuel source — it’s simply part of normal 
metabolic balance.  
 
Ketosis, on the other hand, is a specific metabolic state in which your body relies primarily on 
ketone bodies rather than glucose for fuel. Nutritional ketosis happens when carbohydrate 
intake is very low and fat availability is high — for example, during  fasting or a high -fat low-
carbohydrate ketogenic diet.  
Here’s how it works: Usually, when  fats are broken down through beta ‑oxidation, most tissues 
use the resulting acetyl ‑CoA right away in the citric acid cycle to make ATP. But in low ‑carb 
states, the liver often produces more acetyl ‑CoA than it can use immediately. Since acetyl‑ CoA 
can’t travel through the bloodstream on its own, the liver converts the excess  acetyl -CoA into 
ketone bodies — a form of fuel that can circulate freely in the blood.  The primary ketones 
include:  
• Acetoacetate  
• Beta -hydroxybutyrate  
• Acetone  
These ketone bodie s are released from the liver into the bloodstream and used by other 
tissues, including the brain, as an alternative, highly efficient fuel source. Once taken up into  
cells , ketones are converted back into acetyl ‑CoA, which enters the citric acid cycle and electron 
transport chain to produce ATP — the same way acetyl ‑CoA from carbs or fats is used in cellular 
respiration.  
Slide 11 
Before we move on, l et's do a quick summary of fatty acid metabolism : 
• Lipolysis = breaking stored triglycerides in fat cells into free fatty acids and glycerol  
• Beta ‑oxidation = breaking those fatty acids into acetyl ‑CoA. That acetyl ‑CoA can then 
enter the citric acid cycle and electron transport chain to make ATP , a process we refer 
to as cellular respiration.  
• Nutritional ketosis = a metabolic state where ketone  bodies , made from surplus  
acetyl ‑CoA in the liver, become a primary  fuel source. Once  taken  up in other  cells and  
tissues, ketones are converted back into acetyl ‑CoA, which can undergo cellular 
respiration to produce ATP.  
 
Thinking about how these processes relate to each other, k etosis requires both lipolysis and 
beta ‑oxidation to occur, but because these steps happen upstream, they can take place without 
leading to ketosis. Even in a  non- ketogenic diet , your body is constantly doing some level of 
 
lipolysis and beta‑ oxidation , especially overnight, between meals, and during low intensity 
exercise.  
In those situations, fats contribute to your daily energy needs, but glucose is still the dominant 
fuel in most tissues.  You only shift into nutritional ketosis when glucose availability is low and 
fat is the primary fuel for most tissues.  That’s when the liver produces ketones in large enough 
amounts for them to become a main circulating fuel.  
Slide 12  
    
We have talked a lot about producing energy from fats and carbohydrates, but what about 
proteins?    
 When it comes to generating energy from proteins, the process involves a different set of metabolic pathways compared to carbohydrates and fats. The body can convert proteins into glucose through a process called gluconeogenesis. Here again, the name tells  us about the 
meaning; gluco = glucose, neo = new, and genesis = generate.    
  
In general, the body reserves this form of metabolism more for times when dietary protein 
supplies are high and carbohydrates are low, or when we are in a prolonged fasted state. This is 
because protein is so valuable for building and repairing components of the body like the structure of organs, muscles, hormones, connective tissues, etc.    
  
Here are the primary metabolic steps involved in protein metabolism for energy production:   
  
First, proteins are broken down into amino acids, and then a process called deamination takes 
place. During deamination, the amino group (the part that contains nitrogen) is removed from 
the amino acids, leaving a chemical skeleton that is based on the sam e thing glucose is made of 
– carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.    
  
Gluconeogenesis is when these carbon skeletons derived from the breakdown of amino acids can be converted into glucose. Glucose produced through gluconeogenesis can then enter the glycolysis pathway to generate energy –  just the same we create energy from carbohydrates 
using the citric acid cycle and electron transport chain.    
  
Because we had to go through the extra steps of deamination to create our carbohydrate skeleton, the metabolism of protein, or gluconeogenesis, is a more energy -intensive process 
than glycolysis. So while we do end up with net positive energy production, we have to spend more energy to get it. This is part of why high- protein diets are often recommended for weight 
loss.    
  
 
If gluconeogenesis is occurring in the context of an intentional fast, it can lead to the 
breakdown of some damaged proteins in the body that can result in many of the health benefits associated with fasting and autophagy, or self- eating. However, if gluco neogenesis is 
happening long -term or in a starvation state, it can begin to catabolize functional proteins in 
the body, making it very costly to the body.   
  
Slide 13  
   Aside from the catabolism of protein, the body can also perform gluconeogenesis from other noncarbohydrate substances lactate and glycerol.    
  
Lactate is produced as a byproduct when glucose is broken down to provide energy during anaerobic metabolism. Anaerobic means without oxygen. We learned about aerobic 
metabolism when we learned about the use of oxygen in glycolysis and cellular respiration. On 
the other hand, anaerobic metabolism takes place in muscles, in short episodes during intense exercise that causes a rapid depletion of oxygen, or in other tissues when the oxygen supply is low. A slow steady cardiovascular workout, for instance, is a n aerobic exercise where you 
increase the demand and utilization for oxygen but can keep up with those demands by increasing your respiration and pulse. If that supply/demand scale is tipped and there is not enough oxygen to meet the demand for energy production, the body can use anaerobic 
metabolism – so think of super high- intensity weightlifting for instance.    
  
Once lactate is produced in the muscle cells, it is transported to the liver where it is converted 
into glucose and sent out into the bloodstream. When high levels of lactate or lactic acid build up in the muscles, it causes tissue soreness. We also genera te lactate from energy production in 
red blood cells because they do not have mitochondria and use a different form of anaerobic metabolism, which generates some lactate as a byproduct.    
  
So while some amount of lactate is being produced in the background most of the time, it increases much more during anaerobic  exercises. As such, you’ll find that this topic of 
gluconeogenesis from lactate is mostly relevant to sports and performance nutrition, and that’s 
because it is because most people are not entering that oxygen- depleted state through high-
intensity exercis e on a daily or hourly basis, so it is not a major contributor to our glycolytic 
pathways.    
  
Slide 14 
   The final substrate for gluconeogenesis that we will discuss is glycerol. Glycerol comes from the breakdown of triglycerides from adipose tissue. Remember, triglycerides stored in adipose are composed of three fatty acid molecules and one glycerol molecule . When the process of 
lipolysis liberates these lipid stores for fuel, then the fatty acids can go into fatty acid beta -
 
oxidation, while the glycerol can go to the liver to be converted into an intermediate compound 
similar to glucose that can enter glycolysis in the mitochondria This is an important glycolytic energy substrate for the brain during times of prolonged fasting.    
   Before we leave the topic of gluconeogenesis, I wanted to mention an interesting side note. 
Some of the pharmaceutical medications that aim to lower blood glucose in diabetes, such as 
metformin, work in part by inhibiting gluconeogenesis in the liver.    
  
Slide 15  
  
Fructolysis  is the term used to describe the metabolism of dietary fructose to produce energy. 
This process shares many enzymes and metabolic intermediates with the glycolysis pathway. 
Unlike glucose which can be taken up by cells throughout the body, fructose is lim ited to two 
pathways.   
 The primary pathway is in the liver, where it is mainly used to replenish liver glycogen stores and synthesize triglycerides.   
 In muscle and adipose tissue, fructose is phosphorylated by specific enzymes that allow it to enter glycolysis and go into energy production in those cells.    
 However, the uptake and utilization of fructose in peripheral tissues are limited, and so much of the fructose we consume needs to be metabolized by the liver, which can place an added burden on the liver and cause an increase in triglycerides when compare d to glucose 
metabolism. We’ll talk more about fructose in our discussion of glucose dysregulation.    
   
Slide 16  
 So, in general, is it better to burn carbs or fats? The answer is “both” and “it depends”.    
  
CARBS = “KINDLING”    
  
When it comes to fueling our metabolic fire, you can think of carbohydrates as “kindling.” They burn fast and hot, which is perfect for short, intense activity, but they are more quickly depleted and need to be replenished frequently if you are relying on carbohydrates as the primary fuel source.    
  
FATS = “LOGS”    
  
You can think of fats as “logs,” which burn more slowly than kindling and require less constant “stoking” of the metabolic fire. The process of lipolysis and beta- oxidation produces more net 
 
ATP than glycolysis, but it takes much more time and requires more oxygen than glycolysis. We 
also have much more stable supplies of fat storage, so it makes an ideal fuel for slow, long, low -
intensity activity.   
   The term “metabolic flexibility” refers to the capacity of an organism to adapt fuel utilization to 
fuel availability. This means that we can shift between fuel sources based on our circumstances 
in a way that maintains our energy and overall function.    
  Throughout most of human evolutionary history, food availability was sporadic and unpredictable. When food was plentiful, we ate as much as we could, storing excess energy not needed for immediate physiological functions for later use in our livers, muscles, and adipose tissue. When food was scarce, we easily tapped into this stored energy, maintaining the high 
level of focus and performance needed to survive. This metabolic flexibility, coupled with our 
varied, omnivorous diet, allowed homo sapiens to survive and thrive in a wide range of climates and conditions.     That said, chronically consuming surplus fuel long term, in any form, can negatively impact our metabolic health, as can chronic longer -term caloric deprivation. Insulin resistance is an 
example of a loss of metabolic flexibility, and we will look more at different forms of blood 
sugar regulation dysfunction that might call for more specific approaches to macronutrient 
balance.  
        
Slide 17 
 Alright, you made it! That was a lot of information on metabolism. Before we wrap up, let’s do a quick review of some of the terms that can be tricky when you are first learning them.     First, let’s remember that – lysis means to cut or break down, and – genesis means to create.    
  
Response to LOW circulating glucose supply   
  Response to HIGH circulating glucose supply   
  
  
 
Glycogenolysis = break down stored glycogen 
for use = increase blood glucose    
  
Gluconeogenesis = create new glucose from 
non-carbohydrate sources = increase blood 
glucose    
  
Lipolysis = breakdown of stored lipids = use 
alternative fuel, fatty acid beta -oxidation 
rather than glycolysis.     glycogenesis = create glycogen = lower blood 
glucose by moving into storage   
  
lipogenesis = create fatty acids and 
triglycerides = lower blood glucose by moving 
into storage    
  
  
  
Because there are so many technical terms in this video, I would encourage you to watch it 
more than once if you are able. Once the main concepts start to click, you might find they are not as intimidating to understand as they can first appear. That is because our bodies make a lot of sense and have developed some great strategies for managing fuel supply! In our next video, we’ll look at some of the organs and hormones that help to regulate our blood glucose levels.    
  
 
 
 
References   
 
1. Dholariya SJ, Orrick JA. Biochemistry, Fructose Metabolism. PubMed. Published 
2022. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK576428/   
2. Dunn J, Grider MH. Physiology, adenosine triphosphate (ATP). PubMed. 
Published 2022. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK553175/ .  
3. Galgani JE, Moro C, Ravussin E. Metabolic flexibility and insulin resistance. Am J 
Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008;295(5):E1009- E1017. 
doi:10.1152/ajpendo.90558.2008  
4. Leverve X, Batandier C, Fontaine E. Choosing the right substrate. Novartis Found 
Symp . 2007;280:108- 164.  
5. Masood W, Uppaluri KR, Annamaraju P. Ketogenic diet. National Library of 
Medicine. Published March 21, 2019. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK499830/
  
6. Melkonian EA, Schury MP. Physiology, Gluconeogenesis. Nih.gov. Published 
August 22, 2019. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK541119/   
7. Roach PJ, Depaoli- Roach AA, Hurley TD, Tagliabracci VS. Glycogen and its 
metabolism: some new developments and old themes. Biochem J . 2012;441(3):763-
787. doi:10.1042/BJ20111416  
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 1, Video 3  
 
Title Slide 1   
  
Okay, now that we have a solid understanding of what carbohydrates are and how they can be 
absorbed into the body, utilized for energy, or put into or taken out of storage, let’s take a 
closer look at the organs and hormones that are helping to regulate blood sugar balance.    
  
Slide 2   
  
If you were asked, what is the primary organ of blood sugar regulation, what would you say? Maybe the pancreas, right? That would be a reasonable guess, but actually, the brain and autonomic nervous system are the primary regulators of blood sugar regulation, which in turn directs the activity of the other 5 primary peripheral organs and tissues. We like to use the 
acronym PAALS to refer to those 5 primary organs of blood sugar regulation, which stands for 
pancreas, adrenals, adipose tissue, liver, and skel etal muscle.    
  
So, let’s review the role of the brain and central nervous system first, and then look at each organ of the PAALS individually.    
  
Within the brain, we have our hypothalamus, which is considered a region of the brain, and the pituitary gland which is located just below the hypothalamus but is considered part of the endocrine system rather than a brain region.    
  
You’ve already heard about the hypothalamus and pituitary earlier in the program, as they were involved in sensing the feedback from the intestines and enteric nervous system of the digesti ve tract  and regulating things like hunger, thirst, and digestive secretions. They were also 
involved in controlling the body's circadian rhythms and sleep -wake cycles, and governing the 
hormonal output from other endocrine glands in the body in what are referred to as axes with glands like the thyroid, ovaries, and testes. Now here they are again, serving as a bridge between the endocrine system and the nervous system to help regulate blood sugar.    
  
As a reminder, the pituitary gland is often referred to as the "master gland" because it produces 
and releases several important hormones that control other endocrine glands.   In general, 
these hormones are not the ones we hear a lot about, like insulin or  cortisol that affect cells 
 
throughout the body. Instead, they are highly specialized hormones that will often speak to 
specific PAALS, telling them to increase or decrease the production of some hormone or enzyme.    
  
For example, the hypothalamus stimulates the pituitary to make the hormone adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), which in turn, stimulates the adrenal glands to release cortisol, which is involved in glucose metabolism and promotes the release of stored fuel to 
increase blood glucose supply.    
  
Another example is human growth hormone, which is produced by the pituitary gland and acts 
on various tissues, including the pancreas, liver, and adipose tissue, to promote the breakdown 
of stored fuel.   
  
It's important to note, however, that while the hypothalamus and pituitary are the major regulators in the system, we will also find that each of the PAALS has other specialized cells and feedback mechanisms that allow them to respond to metabolic needs in  more direct and local 
ways as well.    
  
Slide  3  
  
To summarize:   
 
• The hypothalamus monitors signals about blood glucose levels through 
specialized sensing neurons that can gather information about circulating hormones 
and nutrients.    
 
• If glucose levels are deemed too high or too low, the hypothalamus 
communicates needed changes in blood sugar levels to the pituitary gland.  
   
• The pituitary then directs the activity of the “PAALS” in response. This is 
achieved either indirectly through hormonal signals and/or directly through efferent 
neurons of the autonomic nervous system.   
 
• If glucose is deemed to be low, it can increase the conversion of stored fuel to 
raise blood glucose levels, or if it is too high, it can stimulate the uptake, utilization, and storage of circulating glucose supplies to lower circulating blood glucose levels.     
 
• Each of the PAALS also has its own local mechanisms to help regulate 
metabolism.   
  
 
Simply put, if blood sugar regulation were an orchestra, the brain and nervous system would be 
the conductor, and the “PAALS” would be the instruments.   
  
Slide 4   
 Okay, now that we know who is conducting the orchestra, let’s take a close look at each of the 
PAALS and the hormones they produce or respond to.    
    
You’ll recall from Digestion that the pancreas has a dual role – an exocrine function of secreting 
enzymes and bicarbonate into the intestinal lumen, and an endocrine role producing hormones 
to regulate blood sugar levels and growth in the body.   
  
In terms of the sheer volume of production, the exocrine or digestive production is much larger 
than the endocrine side, which is reflected in the fact that about 1 -2% of the mass of the 
pancreas is involved in endocrine hormone production. These small but mighty parts of the 
pancreas are referred to as pancreatic islets or islets of Langerhans, and although th ey are only 
1–2% of the pancreas by volume, they receive 10 –15% of its blood flow.   
  
The majority of  cell types within the pancreatic islets are alpha and beta cells. Alpha cells 
produce glucagon, and beta cells produce insulin, our two blood sugar regulatory hormones produced in the pancreas. Interestingly, these two hormones have counterregulatory role s.  
  
Slide 5   
   
Insulin helps to move glucose from the bloodstream into cells in a fed state. It normally 
increases and decreases in concordance with levels of glucose entering the bloodstream from 
the digestive tract -  increasing when blood sugar rises and lowering with blood sugar declines 
between meals or during a fast.    
  
To achieve this, insulin does not directly move the glucose into the cell. Instead, it docks on a receptor in the cell membrane of a target cell and triggers the movement of a special protein to come to the surface of that cell membrane so it can act as a little portal for the glucose to enter the cell through.    
  
These special proteins are called glucose transport proteins, or GLUT proteins. The human genome codes for 14 different types of GLUT proteins, and they are expressed at different rates in different cells and tissues. They also respond to different stimuli . Not every GLUT protein is 
dependent on insulin to move into the membrane and allow glucose to enter the cell! We’ll come back to this topic of GLUT proteins when we discuss muscle tissue.    
  
 
A helpful way to understand insulin is to understand that it is considered an anabolic hormone, 
which means that it stimulates growth and storage in tissues. At the same time that it should be lowering glucose and moving it into cells to produce energy or storage forms, it is also promoting the synthesis of structural proteins in muscle tissue, and it also inhibits the degradation of muscle protein in the body. That makes sense right? We are not wanting to liberate fuel; insulin is telling cells that nutrition has arrived and it is time to use the fuel that is already in circulation to build tissue and store extra fuel. This is why  athletes who want  to build 
more muscle will often try to leverage insulin’s anabolic signal to boost muscle synthesis. In fact, some bodybuilders even inject insulin for this reason!    
   
On the flip side, elevated insulin can block weight loss because it gives the signal to “store” and inhibits pathways like glycogenolysis and lipolysis.    
  
We will discuss more about the exact mechanisms by which insulin helps stimulate the cellular uptake of glucose, and how it can go wrong, in our section on dysregulation. As we will see, there are a lot of individuals who struggle with chronically elevated  insulin levels and loss of 
insulin’s function, but we want to be careful not to demonize insulin. Insulin is an incredibly important hormone that we need for many vital processes in the body, which is why it is important to keep it well -regulated  and supp ort our cells in staying sensitive and responsive to 
its signal.   
  
Slide 6   
  
As I mentioned earlier, glucagon sends the opposite signal to the body from insulin. While 
insulin is an anabolic hormone – stimulating tissue growth and storage, glucagon is a catabolic 
hormone, stimulating the breakdown or catabolism of tissue.    
  
Glucagon is produced in the alpha cells of the pancreas to stimulate the release of stored fuel 
when our circulating glucose levels begin to drop into the lower range. It does this by stimulating the three processes we learned about earlier:    
  
• Increasing glycogenolysis (turning glycogen into glucose)    
• In the liver, the glucose produced from glycogenolysis is released into circulation   
• In muscle, the glucose produced from glycogenolysis is used in situ, meaning in the cells of the muscle tissue   
• Increasing gluconeogenesis (turning proteins and other non -carbohydrates into 
glucose)   
• Increasing lipolysis to tap into fat stores. Remember, we can’t turn this fat into glucose, 
but we can send these fatty acids down the fatty acid beta -oxidation pathway to 
produce energy when glucose and insulin levels are on the lower side of their ranges   
  
 
Slide 7   
  
We could sum this up by saying that insulin says “store” and glucagon says “release.”   
  
Slide 8   
                
It might be surprising to hear that the adrenal glands are critical to blood sugar regulation, but 
when you think about it, adrenals are part of our stress response system, and having adequate levels of blood sugar available to respond to stress is critical to survival, so we see a lot of overlap between these two systems.     
  
In a very literal way, low blood sugar is an emergency. You can view this through two lenses – it 
is viewed as an emergency because if there is a threat, we may need to exert a lot of intense physical work in a fight or flight situation (which requires glu cose). On the other hand, if our 
blood sugar gets low enough for any reason, we can pass out which puts us a risk for injury or death. So, the body relies on stress hormones to help keep glucose levels from falling too low to protect us from this potential  danger. They work alongside glucagon to stabilize our glucose 
levels at those lower ranges.   
  
Recall from lessons on anatomy and physiology that each adrenal gland has two main parts: the outer cortex, and the inner medulla.  The cortex is activated primarily by hormonal signals from 
the pituitary in what is referred to as the hypothalamus pituitary  adrenal axis. Cells within the 
cortex produce a few different hormones that help regulate things like blood pressure and sex characteristics, but most importantly for blood sugar regulation, they produce cortisol.    
 
Cortisol is classified as a glucocorticoid steroid. The name tells us it is a steroid hormone that 
regulates glucose and comes from the cortex of the adrenal gland. Because cortisol is produced in response to hormonal cues from the hypothalamic -pituitary -adrenal axis (HPA axis), it takes 
more time to respond to stressors (minutes rather than seconds), compared to the hormones 
of the medulla, which is hard wired to the central nervous system and respond to stress at lightning speed.   
 The inner medulla produces catecholamine hormones dopamine, adrenaline (a.k.a. epinephrine), and noradrenaline (a.k.a. norepinephrine). Adrenaline and noradrenaline are the key hormones in blood sugar regulation.    
  
Slide  9  
  
To recap, a ll three stress hormones will increase the fuel available to organs critical to survival, 
such as the brain.  Cortisol is the primary hormone of blood sugar regulation made by the 
 
adrenals and is constantly ebbing and flowing throughout the day. Adrenaline and 
noradrenaline step in to amplify cortisol’s effects on blood sugar during times of acute stress.   
The stress hormones achieve their effects by stimulating the metabolic processes we are 
already familiar with:   
  
• Glycogenolysis in the liver, which converts glycogen to glucose   
• Gluconeogenesis which converts non- carbohydrate sources into glucose by the 
liver and muscle tissues   
• Lipolysis which releases fatty acids from triglycerides stored in body fat   
• Decreasing insulin production in the pancreas (which says “stop storing”) and increases glucagon (which says “release fuel")  
  
In addition to these metabolic pathways, cortisol can increase blood glucose by inducing insulin resistance in many cell types.  Liver, adipose, and muscles are particularly susceptible  to 
cortisol’s insulin desensitizing effects. This is one of the reasons why chronic stress can 
contribute to insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome, which we will look at more closely in our section on dysregulation.   
  
 
In acute doses, cortisol is a powerful anti -inflammatory, which is why if you go to the doctor 
with acute inflammation,  you may receive a cortisone shot, but when levels are chronically 
elevated, many cells can become resistant,  and cortisol loses its anti- inflammatory effects.    
 We also learned in the digestive module that cortisol inhibits the digestive system to supply 
more resources to organs involved in the fight -or-flight response.    
  
So, while the pancreas produces hormones that can make blood glucose go up or down, the 
adrenals are always raising glucose –  helping us to deal with emergencies and keep our glucose 
from falling too low.    
  
Slide  10  
  
We are going to skip ahead to the “S” in PAALS because the role of skeletal muscle relates in unique ways to the role of the stress hormones.    
  
We mentioned earlier that not all cells are dependent on insulin to work. Skeletal muscles have 
a type of glucose transporter called GLUT 4, which can move into their cell membranes when stimulated by exercise, independent of insulin.    
  
The skeletal muscles play three key roles in blood sugar regulation:   
  
• Glucose uptake and utilization   
 
• Storing excess glucose as glycogen  
• As discussed earlier, approximately 350 to 500 grams of glucose (1,400 to 2,000 
calories) can be stored in our muscles as glycogen.    
• Note: The glycogen stored in the skeletal muscles can only be used locally to fuel 
the muscles themselves, while that stored in the liver can be used to create serum glucose that can be used anywhere in the body.  
• Providing protein source for gluconeogenesis  
• When blood sugar and glycogen get low, protein from our muscles can be broken down via a process called proteolysis and converted into glucose by the liver.   
 
Slide  11  
  
When blood sugar levels are elevated, the pancreas releases insulin, which signals skeletal and cardiac muscles to uptake glucose.    
  
As a quick review, the movement of glucose in and out of cells is facilitated by glucose GLUT4 transport proteins, which are found primarily in skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, brain tissue, and adipose tissue. When insulin binds with receptor sites on the surface of a cell, GLUT -4 
transporters translocate from the cytoplasm of the cell into the plasma membrane, where they act like channels allowing glucose to move into the cell.    
  
Of great clinical relevance, there is another way to initiate the movement of GLUT -4 to the cell 
membranes in skeletal muscle, even when insulin receptors are not working, as in the case of insulin resistance. Physical exercise increases glucose uptake ind ependently of insulin through a 
contraction -mediated pathway. In other words, muscle contraction during work or exercise 
activates alternative pathways within the cytoplasm that initiate  the translocation of GLUT4 
proteins into the membrane –  even without insulin’s signal. This is one of many reasons why 
exercise is so helpful in lowering glucose levels in t ype 2 diabetes.   
  
If you’ll recall, our adrenal hormones raise blood sugar. But they also cause insulin resistance in cells. This would seem like an oxymoron –  why raise glucose and make us unable to use it at the 
same time? Well, this is one reason –  we become insulin resi stant in cell  types that are less 
needed for immediate survival, but also, if we are using our muscles, then they can still uptake the glucose, circumventing this stress- induced insulin resistance.  
 
In the course of evolutionary history, high stress would usually be paired with the need for a lot of physical movement, but unfortunately, we often experience a lot of mental -emotional stress 
without the accompanying movement to help uptake and dispose of the glucose, like sitting in 
our car in rush hour traffic, for instance. The good news is that this means that exercise, even 
 
light to moderate walking after meals can be very helpful in managing glucose levels, even in 
the context of insulin resistance.    
     
Slide  12  
  
Adipose tissue is a form of loose connective tissue composed primarily of adipocytes (fat cells), which store energy in the form of triglycerides. Adipose tissue is what you think of when you think of body fat. Triglycerides are the most common form of fat in the body. They come 
directly from the fats and oils in our diets, but they are also synthesized in the liver from excess carbohydrates. To make triglycerides, the liver first converts glucose into fatty acids, and then 
attaches three fatty acids to one  glycerol molecule –  thus the name tri -glyceride.    
  
Remember, gram for gram, triglycerides contain more energy than glycogen and can be stored 
in a relatively more compact form, plus, we can expand our adipose tissue more than we can expand our glycogen reserves in the liver and skeletal muscles, so adipose  tissue serves as the 
main energy reserve in the body.    
  
The body will increase stores of triglycerides in adipose cells when certain conditions are met:  
 
• Full glycogen stores, high blood sugar levels, high insulin levels  
 
In this way, adipose tissue is helping  to manage high blood glucose levels by giving the body a 
place to put surplus fuel when we can’t burn it.    
  
When the opposite conditions are met:  
 
• Depleted glycogen stores, low blood sugar levels, and low insulin levels,  
 
This stored energy can be freed from adipocytes and used by many different cell types 
throughout the body to produce energy through lipolysis and fatty acid beta -oxidation .   
  
However, the role of adipose tissue in blood sugar regulation is more nuanced than just serving 
as a storage vessel. The tissue also acts as an endocrine gland, synthesizing and secreting a number of hormones, including leptin, a hormone that inhibits hung er signals. We discussed 
leptin in terms of digestion and appetite regulation, but as you see, the y are important in blood 
sugar as well because they influence how much fuel we take in.    
  
   
 
Slide  13  
  
Adipocytes also produce adiponectin, a signaling compound that is a well -known homeostatic 
factor for regulating glucose levels, lipid metabolism, and insulin sensitivity. Adiponectin is 
protective against the development of obesity and Type 2 Diabetes, and low levels have been 
strongly associated with these metabolic states. It is thought that adiponectin secreted from 
adipocytes h elps maintain normal blood sugar levels through various mechanisms:   
 
• Enhances insulin sensitivity in target tissues such as the liver and muscles.    
• Suppress gluconeogenesis, or new glucose production in the liver.   
• Promotes fatty acid beta -oxidation  in muscles.    
• It has anti -inflammatory properties that help reduce chronic low- grade 
inflammation often associated with obesity and insulin resistance.   
• Interacts with specific receptors in the hypothalamus that can reduce appetite 
and increase  feelings of satiety.   
  
  
Slide  14   
 
I have good news for you –  you have basically already learned about its key roles in blood sugar 
regulation when you learned about all the big – lysis and – genesis words of metabolism. The 
liver is responsible for:   
  
• Glycogenesis - Converting glucose into glycogen and holding it for storage in liver 
tissue and muscle tissue   
 
• Glycogenolysis - Converting glycogen back into glucose for use as energy around 
the body   
 
• Converting protein into glucose via gluconeogenesis    
 
• Ketogenesis  - converting fatty acids into ketones   
     
• Lipogenesis - Converting surplus glucose into triglycerides for storage in adipose 
tissue   
  
Lest we forget, the liver is also responsible for converting other monosaccharides (galactose and fructose) into glucose in the first place.    
  
It really is amazing to think of the many other roles that the liver also has to serve at the same time – biotransformation and elimination (aka detox), bile production for emulsifying fats, 
 
cholesterol homeostasis, hormone metabolism, and so much more. Making sure we are not 
overburdening the liver with excess glucose and fructose will free it up to perform these other vital functions, which is one of the many reasons why achieving a healthy blood sugar balance 
can have such  a ripple effect throughout the body.    
   
Slide 15   
 
As a quick summary of the PAALS:   
The pancreas produces insulin, which will lower blood glucose by telling the body to use it for energy or 
store it. The pancreas also produced glucagon, which counteracts insulin to help raise blood glucose and 
release stored fuel.  
The a drenals  produce cortisol, which raises blood glucose,  and a drenaline and noradrenaline , which 
amplify  cortisol's effects  during acute stress response  
Adipose  tissue helps lower blood glucose by acting as a storage site once glucose has been converted 
into triglycerides. It also releases lipids for energy during fasting windows and  produces hormones like 
adiponectin and leptin that regulate appetite and metabolism .   
Liver converts all fuel types as needed, and acts as a glycogen storage site.  
Skeletal Muscles help lower blood glucose by  utilizing glucose in large amounts and storing glycogen.  
 
Slide 16    
  
Congratulations! We made it through the PAALS – the key organs and the hormones they 
produce to regulate blood sugar, but before we move on, I want to mention one other group of 
hormones called incretins.    
  
We mentioned these briefly  in our digestion module because they are produced in the digestive 
tract, but incretins play a significant role in blood glucose regulation, particularly in response to meals. The two primary incretins involved are:   
  
• Glucagon -like peptide -1 (GLP -1): GLP -1 is produced in the intestine and colon in 
response to food, and it helps stimulate insulin secretion in a glucose -dependent 
manner. This means that GLP -1 helps lower blood glucose after carbohydrate -rich 
meals. Additionally, GLP -1 suppresses glucagon secretion, which helps to reduce the 
release of stored glycogen. GLP -1 also slows down gastric emptying, which can help 
regulate the rate at which glucose is absorbed from the gut into the bloodstream.    
 
 
• Glucose -dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP): GIP is similar to GLP -1 in that it 
is released from the small intestine and plays a role in stimulating insulin secretion in 
response to elevated blood glucose levels. However, GIP's impact on blood glucose regulation is generally considered weaker than that of GLP -1. GIP also promotes the 
storage of fat in adipose tissue.   
  
These incretins and their receptors are major targets for the pharmaceutical management of Type 2 diabetes. GLP -1 agonist medications work by activating GLP -1 receptors in the pancreas, 
which leads to enhanced insulin release and reduced glucagon release. Other medications that 
block the breakdown of GLP -1 and GIP.   
 
These medications have also been increasingly used as weight loss medications, although their side effects can be serious and they can cause significant metabolic damage when used inappropriately.    
  
Alright, that is a wrap for this video on the organs and hormones of blood sugar regulation. I’ll see you in our next video to discuss measurements of blood glucose.   
 
 
References   
 
1. Choi JH, Kim MS. Homeostatic Regulation of Glucose Metabolism by the Central 
Nervous System. Endocrinology and Metabolism . 2022;37(1):9 -25. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3803/enm.2021.1364   
2. Cox RA, García- Palmieri MR. Cholesterol, Triglycerides, and Associated 
Lipoproteins. Nih.gov. Published 2000. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK351/   
3. Nigro E, Scudiero O, Monaco ML, et al. New Insight into Adiponectin Role in 
Obesity and Obesity -Related Diseases. BioMed Research International . 2014;2014:1 -
14. doi:https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/658913   
4. Parmar RM, Can AS. Physiology, Appetite And Weight Regulation. PubMed. 
Published 2022. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK574539/   
5. Richter EA, Hargreaves M. Exercise, GLUT4, and Skeletal Muscle Glucose Uptake. 
Physiological Reviews. 2013;93(3):993- 1017. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00038.2012   
6. Rosen ED, Spiegelman BM. Adipocytes as regulators of energy balance and 
glucose homeostasis. Nature . 2006;444(7121):847- 853. doi:10.1038/nature05483  
7. Thau  L, Gandhi J, Sharma S. Physiology, Cortisol. National Library of Medicine. 
Published February 15, 2019. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK538239/   
 
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 1, Video 4  
 
Title Slide 1   
  
Welcome back! We’ve  covered a lot of the nitty gritty science behind carbohydrates, how our 
bodies can absorb, utilize, and store glucose, and what organs and hormones help regulate the 
metabolism of glucose. Now, let’s put this all together and look more at  what most clients will 
care most about –  measurements of blood glucose levels.    
  
Slide 2   
  
As a quick reminder, we are not studying blood sugar levels in order to diagnose clients with a metabolic disease. Rather than being solely diagnostic, measuring blood sugar levels can serve as a powerful educational tool for someone looking to better understand their own balance 
long before they arrive at a disease state.    
  
As you will see, measuring blood sugar levels can be a prophylactic tool used to identify the body’s response to specific foods. Having a little more data than just fasting blood glucose once a year can help a client identify correlations between their blo od sugar levels and things like 
activities, energy levels, sleep, mood, cognitive function, or changes to their overall sense of well- being  like aggravation of signs and symptoms.    
  
It is also important for Nutritional Therapy Practitioners to have some understanding of blood sugar ranges in case you are working with a client who has been diagnosed with a condition like prediabetes or Type 2 diabetes. They may have identified certain goals and special concerns with their primary care provider, and being familiar with blood sugar ranges can help you become confident as you work with diet and lifestyle to support those goals. It can also help give you a better sense of when you may need to refer someone to their primary care provider 
for help with blood sugar issues.     
  
 
  
   
 
Slide 3   
   
Because our glucose levels are dynamic and fluctuate during the day, we have to think about 
blood glucose not just as a single static number. For instance, measuring before meals and after 
meals will tell us different things.    
  
Fasting blood glucose levels (FBG) refers to your glucose levels after at least 8 hours of not eating. This level helps you understand your baseline, so to speak.     
  
Postprandial blood glucose (PPG) is generally taken 1 to 2 hours after eating, and this 
measurement helps you understand how your body responds  to the meal.      
  
Most doctors are trained that “normal” means any fasting blood glucose level under 100 mg/dL 
(5.6 mmol/L) and postprandial blood glucose levels less than 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L).  
 However, what constitutes  truly “normal” or “healthy” FBG and PPG levels is a controversial 
topic. For example, in one study, individuals with FBG levels above 95 mg/dL (5.3 mmol/L) had more than 3 times the risk of developing Type 2 Diabetes than those with FBG levels below 90.    
  
Another study showed progressively increasing risks of heart disease in individuals with FBG levels above 85 mg/dL (4.7 mmol/L) compared to those with FBG levels below 81 mg/dL (4.5 mmol/L).   
  
So while a fasting glucose level of 100mg may  still be considered normal, there is a lot of 
evidence to suggest that maintaining levels closer to 80 or 90 is a better target for reducing the 
risk of cardiometabolic disease and many other unfavorable health outcomes.    
   
Slide 4   
   
Hypoglycemia is the term used to describe too little glucose. A fasting blood sugar of approximately 70 mg/dL is generally thought to be hypoglycemic. Symptoms often include 
brain fog, irritability, shakiness, headaches, paleness, hunger, nausea, fatigue, loss of focus, lightheadedness, and anxiety.    
  
However, many people accustomed to maintaining  lower glucose levels (low carb/fat adapted) 
can rely more on gluconeogenesis and lipolysis and may not have any symptoms or adverse effects of blood glucose in this range.  On the other hand, individuals who  have higher blood 
sugar most of the time will be much more likely to experience symptoms of hypoglycemia because their body is not accustomed to that  metabolic state.  
 
 
Hypoglycemia is often seen as a response, or reactive  state of hypoglycemia following an 
episode of high blood sugar and high insulin levels that cause a blood sugar crash after the 
glycemic spike has resolved . Low blood sugar is often seen in individuals suffering from Type 1 
and Type 2 Diabetes who experience large fluctuations in their blood sugar levels and effects from their glucose -lowering pharmaceutical drugs.    
  
Slide 5   
  
Hyperglycemia is the term used to describe a state of excessive glucose and is generally recognized  as 180 -  200 mg/dL at any point, fasting or postprandial. This is often seen in 
individuals who are suffering from type 1 or t ype 2 diabetes. Symptoms often include frequent 
urination, increased thirst, blurred vision, weakness, and fatigue. These symptoms can progress, however, and acute hyperglycemia can cause confusion, nausea and vomiting, shortness of breath, and even loss of consc iousness.    
  
To be clear, the negative effects of high blood sugar begin accumulating far before glucose levels reach 180 -200,  however. A fasting blood sugar level of 100 -125 is considered prediabetic, 
and levels over 125 are considered diabetic.    
  
Numerous factors can contribute to elevated blood glucose levels beyond simply consuming excessive sugar or refined carbohydrates. These include chronic stress, inadequate sleep, environmental toxins, genetics, and lifestyle.    
  
We will discuss hyperglycemia and blood glucose dysregulation in more detail, as well as 
contributing factors, later in the module.    
  
Slide 6   
  
Monitoring your blood glucose levels can be an essential part of maintaining optimal health, especially if you have signs or symptoms of hyper or hypoglycemia or have been told by a healthcare  provider that you have reactive hypoglycemia, prediabetes , or diabetes.    
 Even if you do not yet have compromised blood glucose regulation, many people find that measuring their blood glucose after certain meals helps them better understand how specific foods affect them, and build correlations between how they feel, what they ate, and how their 
blood glucose responded.   There are various glucose monitoring devices available, such as glucose meters and continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) systems.  Traditional glucose meters require a finger- prick blood 
sample, which most experienced users will tell you sounds worse than it actually is.  Glucose 
meters are tried and true, affordable, and easily accessible for most individuals. They only read 
 
a serum glucose level at one moment in time, but most current models are able to connect to a 
smartphone  to help track readings and assist in picking on trends.  
 
Continuous Glucose Monitors (CGM) consist of a small sensor that is inserted beneath the skin, usually in the abdomen or arm. The sensor measures glucose levels in the interstitial fluid through a tiny filament or electrode. The glucose readings are then t ransmitted wirelessly to a 
receiver or a smartphone app, providing continuous and real- time data about glucose levels.   
 If someone has decided they would like to take more regular measures of their glucose levels, 
the decision between finger -prick tests and CGMs is very individual. The price difference can be 
very significant , and different individuals will have different levels of need and interest in terms 
of tracking their blood glucose.    
  
For some individuals, the constant data stream from a CMG can steer their thinking into 
unhelpful obsessive territory that can cause a lot of food anxiety and stress. These people may prefer short- term  experimentation with a finger prick test that allows them to craft a more 
sensorial and intuitive -based approach to balancing blood glucose. Oftentimes , just a few 
periodic blood readings will be enough to give someone a lot of insight and point them in the right direction.    
  
For others, CGM s can be incredibly empowering tools that finally bring insight to hard -to-
explain  signs and symptoms and can be incredibly motivating as they make decisions 
throughout the day. If a client thrives on having lots of data points and is highly driven by 
performance goals or health concerns and wants to invest the additional money and focus into 
a CGM, then more power to them!    
  
Either test will involve a little learning curve to ensure maximum accuracy, and the 
manufacturer should be able to provide that information.    
  
We will discuss glucose monitoring more later in the program and will be directing you to some 
required reading to help you explore these tools, learn more about the pros and cons of each approach, and determine how you might use them in practice.    
  
Slide 7   
   
Finally, in terms of measuring glucose, we have h emoglobin A1c (HbA1c). This is a blood test 
that does not directly measure glucose levels in the blood. Rather, it aims to measure the estimated average blood glucose levels over a period of time.   
  
HbA1c is formed when glucose in the bloodstream attaches to hemoglobin, a protein in red blood cells. The higher the glucose levels in the blood, the more glucose attaches to 
 
hemoglobin. As red blood cells have a lifespan of about 2 to 3 months, measuring HbA1c 
reflects the average blood glucose concentration during that period. The results are usually expressed as a percentage, with higher values indicating poorer blood glucos e control.    
  
HbA1c is commonly used as a diagnostic tool for diabetes and as a monitoring tool to assess the effectiveness of diabetes management and treatment plans. It is also used to evaluate the risk of developing diabetes in individuals with prediabetes. This is not a test that someone can perform for themselves, like the glucose monitors we just mentioned, so it will be more likely that a client will discuss with you in reference to their primary care.    
  
There are several ways that HbA1 c readings can be skewed. First, if enough blood sugar spikes 
occur, it can drive the ratio up, making the average look higher than it may actually be. Also, any health condition that extends the life or slows the turnover rate of red blood cells, such as iron deficiency anemia, will result in a higher HbA1c because there is more time for the red blood cells to become glycated – even if the average glucose level is low.   
  
Slide 8   
   
Let’s wrap up this learning objective with a quick overview of healthy glucose regulation in 
action.    
  
After not eating for several hours, our blood sugar levels should be in the lower range of “normal” - about 70 -90mg/dL. Of course, the time it takes to return to lower ranges will depend 
on the meal and the person’s insulin signaling .   
 
 
When we eat a meal, our blood sugar gradually rises to the upper normal level, about 120 -
140mg/dL. As blood sugar rises, complex signaling pathways (including the incretin Glucagon -
Like Peptide -1) begin activating the PAALS in order to lower blood glucose and maintain 
metabolic homeostasis. They send the message to use and store – and don’t add any more 
glucose to the bloodstream.    
  
The pancreas  secretes insulin to stimulate the movement of glucose from the blood into cells to 
be burned as fuel, or if there is already enough energy supply, to store as glycogen and triglycerides for later use.   
 
 
 Blood sugar levels slowly decline between meals (but still in the healthy range) and the body 
releases glucagon to stimulate the release of stored fuel supplies. If blood glucose tips low enough, adrenal hormones are also released to help mobilize stored fuel into the bloodstream 
as glucose to stabilize the lower threshold between meals. Glycogen begins  to be used, fatty 
acids are liberated for beta -oxidation , and gluconeogenesis can turn non -carbohydrate sources 
into glucose.    
 
  
 If dietary carbohydrate and glycogen levels are depleted long enough, the liver can increase 
the use of fatty acids and ketogenic amino acids leucine and lysine to produce ketone bodies as 
a primary fuel source, along with the conversion of glucogenic amino acids (most amino acids) to produce glucose (gluconeogenesis) for fuel.  Finally, we get to our next meal, and the process 
begins again.   
 
References   
 
1. Adolfsson P, Parkin CG, Thomas A, Krinelke LG. Selecting the Appropriate 
Continuous Glucose Monitoring System –  a Practical Approach. European 
Endocrinology . 2018;14(1):24. doi:https://doi.org/10.17925/ee.2018.14.1.24  
2. Eyth E, Naik R. Hemoglobin A1C. PubMed. Published 2023. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK549816/   
3. Goyal R, Nguyen M, Jialal I. Glucose Intolerance. PubMed. Published 2020. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK499910/   
4. Mayo Clinic. Hypoglycemia -  Symptoms and causes. Mayo Clinic. Published 
March 13, 2020. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases -
conditions/hypoglycemia/symptoms -causes/syc -
20373685#:~:text=Hypoglycemia%20is%20a%20condition%20in   
5. Nichols GA, Hillier TA, Brown JB. Normal fasting plasma glucose and risk of type 2 
diabetes diagnosis. Am J Med . 2008;121(6):519- 524. 
doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2008.02.026  
6. Tirosh A, Shai I, Tekes -Manova D, et al. Normal Fasting Plasma Glucose Levels 
and Type 2 Diabetes in Young Men. New England Journal of Medicine . 
2005;353(14):1454- 1462. doi:https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa050080   
 
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 2, Video 1  
 
Title Slide  1  
 
Welcome back. Now that we’ve established  a strong understanding of how healthy blood sugar 
regulation functions, it is time to look at dysfunction. This is likely to be one of the most common foundational issues that your clients will experience because it is just so common in our modern societi es.   
  
Slide  2  
 Type 2 d iabetes is an escalating health problem that is recognized across the world as a major 
health epidemic.    
  
It regularly falls within the top 10 leading causes of death and accounts for the majority of healthcare dollars spent in the U.S. This chronic health condition characterized by blood sugar dysregulation has become a global health pandemic showing no signs  of slowing down.   
  
In 2023 in the United States, the CDC estimated that 37.2 million people of all ages are living with a diagnosis of diabetes, which is 11.3% of the total population, with even higher incidence rates of 48.8% in adults 65 years or  older. Shockingly, it does not consider the other 96 million 
Americans living with prediabetes. This reveals that 1 in 2 U.S. adults are now affected by either diabetes or prediabetes.   
  
Globally, the number of adults with diabetes increased from 108 million in 1980 to 422 million in 2014. That is a 4x increase, and the numbers have only continued to rise over the past decade.    
  
In 2019, approximately 463 million adults were living with diabetes globally, and this number is estimated to rise to 700 million by 2045.    
  
Sadly, more and more children are being affected by t ype 2 d iabetes. Previously, t ype 1 
diabetes was known as juvenile diabetes because it is an autoimmune disorder that generally 
begins in childhood, whereas  type two was referred to as “adult -onset diabetes” because it was 
typically seen after years of ongoing blood sugar dysregulation. These age -based names are no 
 
longer accurate due to the rising incidence of t ype 2 diabetes in children driven by high 
glycemic diets.    
  
To better understand this epidemic of glucose dysregulation, let’s review a few key concepts 
like insulin resistance, and then look at how glucose dysregulation can progress over time, which we refer to as the stages of dysglycemia.    
  
Slide  3  
  
Insulin resistance is a condition in which cells in the body become less responsive to the effects 
of insulin.    
   
When the hormone insulin docks on a receptor located on the outer surface of a target cell’s 
membrane, like a muscle cell, it normally triggers a cascade of enzymatic and chemical reactions within the cytoplasm called secondary messenger systems that help spread insulin's signal and initiate the insertion of those Glut4 proteins into the membranes to allow glucose to enter the ce ll.   
   
With insulin resistance, the insulin receptors on target cells have lost their sensitivity to insulin's signal. In the context of high glycemic diets, you can think of it like hearing loss after listening to a loud rock concert for too long. As a result, t he pancreas produces more insulin in an attempt 
to compensate for the resistance and maintain normal blood sugar levels.    
  
Early on, the body may still produce sufficient amounts of  insulin, but the insulin is not able to 
properly facilitate the entry of glucose into the cells. As a result, blood sugar levels remain elevated, leading to hyperglycemia. Over time, this increased demand for insulin can lead to higher insulin levels in the bloodstream as well, a condition known as hyperinsulinemia.    
   
Ongoing high carbohydrate intake along with prolonged insulin resistance and increased demand for insulin can strain the pancreatic beta cells that produce insulin. Over time, the pancreas can become exhausted and may not be able to produce sufficient insulin.   
   
Insulin resistance is often associated with high blood pressure, weight gain (especially excess abdominal or visceral fat) hormonal dysregulation, inflammation, fatigue, and more.    
   
In addition to high glycemic diets, there are many other contributing facts that we'll explore more in a later video, like chronic stress, hormone imbalances, environmental toxins, genetics, etc.   
  
  
 
Slide  4  
 
You may also hear the term “glucose intolerance,” which is closely related to insulin resistance.    
  
As we just learned, insulin resistance refers to a condition in which cells in the body become 
less responsive to the effects of insulin, leading to both a decreased ability to take up glucose 
from the bloodstream and hyperinsulinemia.   
  
On the other hand, glucose intolerance refers to the body's inability to process and metabolize 
glucose effectively. It is often used as a broader term to describe impaired glucose regulation 
and includes conditions such as prediabetes and T ype 2 D iabetes.    
  
Insulin resistance is a key factor contributing to the development of glucose intolerance. Tests such as a glucose tolerance test can assess insulin function in the body, and failing these tests is often referred to as glucose intolerance.   
  
So, again, the term insulin resistance refers to the decreased responsiveness of cells to insulin, 
while glucose intolerance refers to the body's inability to effectively process and metabolize glucose.   
 
  
Slide  5  
  
There are many ways that hyperglycemia can damage our bodies internally. At the heart of many of these damages is the process of glycation.    
  
Glycation is a chemical reaction that occurs when glucose molecules in the bloodstream bind to proteins or lipids. It is a non -enzymatic process that can happen when blood glucose levels are 
elevated. It is kind of intuitive  when you think about the nature of sugar – whether in a sauté 
pan, on your fingers, or in your blood –  it is sticky stuff.    
  
This reaction leads to the formation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs). AGEs can persist and accumulate in tissues over time and cause damage to cells and tissues throughout the body. Unfortunately, once glycation occurs, is generally considered to  be irreversible. 
Glycation is a natural process that occurs in everyone with aging, but rapid glycation via high blood sugar is like aging in fast forward and it can impact virtually every system in the body, making AGEs a sadly accurate and ironic acrony m for the term.   
  
When glycation alters the structure and function of proteins and lipids, it impairs their normal 
function but also promotes inflammation and oxidative stress, furthering the pathological 
changes seen in chronic hyperglycemia. Glycation is especially detrimental to the endothelial 
 
lining of blood vessels, which affects the blood supply to all of our tissues, including those that 
are commonly impacted with diabetes like the kidneys and cardiovascular system. Glycation is also especially dangerous for nerves, which is why neuropathy a nd vision problems are so 
commonly seen in individuals with diabetes.    
  
It is important to note that it is not just chronically elevated glucose that leads to glycation, but sharp spikes in glucose also contribute to this process.   
  
By the way, I hope this description of glycation is reminding you of our discussion on 
hemoglobin  A1c, a marker of glycation of red blood cells.    
  
Slide  6  
  
Alright , in our next video, we will walk through the s tages of d ysglycemia to understand how 
dysregulation progresses over time and to facilitate that discussion, let’s first review commonly 
recognized glucose ranges. As a reminder, we do not diagnose prediabetes or diabetes, but this information can be helpful to have  as you help a client move toward their blood sugar goals.   
  
Healthy Blood Sugar Range:   
• Fasting Blood Glucose: (8hr after eating) Below 100 mg/dL (5.5 mmol/L)    
• Lower risk at 70 -90 mg/dL   
• Postprandial Blood Glucose: (2 hrs after eating) Below 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L)   
  
Prediabetes:   
• Impaired Fasting Glucose (IFG): Fasting blood glucose levels between 100 to 125 mg/dL (5.6 to 6.9 mmol/L)   
• Impaired Glucose Tolerance (IGT): Two -hour postprandial blood 
glucose levels between 140 to 199 mg/dL (7.8 to 11.0 mmol/L)   
  
Diabetes:   
• Fasting Blood Glucose: Above 125 mg/dL (6.9 mmol/L) on more than one occasion   
• Post Prandial Blood Glucose: Equal to or above 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) on more than one occasion    
• Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT): Two -hour postprandial blood 
glucose equal to or above 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) during an oral glucose tolerance test   
• HbA1c: Equal to or above 6.5% (48 mmol/mol) on more than one occasion   
 
 
That is a wrap for this video. I’ll see you in the next video to discuss the stages of dysglycemia.    
 
 
References   
 
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National diabetes statistics report. 
CDC. Published June 29, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/data/statistics -
report/index.html   
2. Freeman AM, Pennings N. Insulin Resistance. nih.gov. Published 2019. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK507839/   
3. Goyal R, Nguyen M, Jialal I. Glucose Intolerance. PubMed. Published 2020. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK499910/   
4. International Diabetes Federation. International Diabetes Federation - Facts & 
figures. Idf.org. Published September 12, 2021. 
https://www.idf.org/aboutdiabetes/what- is-diabetes/facts -figures.html   
5. NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD -RisC). Worldwide trends in diabetes since 
1980: a pooled analysis of 751 population -based studies with 4·4 million 
participants. The Lancet . 2016;387(10027):1513- 1530. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140 -6736(16)00618- 8  
6. Prasad C, Davis KE, Imrhan V, Juma S, Vijayagopal P. Advanced Glycation End 
Products and Risks for Chronic Diseases: Intervening Through Lifestyle Modification. American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine . 2017;13(4):384- 404. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1177/1559827617708991   
7. Tangjittipokin W, Srisawat L, Teerawattanapong N, Narkdontri T, Homsanit M, 
Plengvidhya N. Prevalence and Characteristics of Prediabetes and Metabolic Syndrome in Seemingly Healthy Persons at a Health Check -Up Clinic. Journal of 
Multidisciplinary Healthcare . 2022;Volume 15:1585- 1594. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.2147/jmdh.s374164  
 
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 2, Video 2  
 
Title Slide  1  
 
Slide  2  
  
To better understand how different states of glycemia compare and progress, we are going to 
use a framework of 4 Phases of Dysglycemia.    
  
1: Reactive Hypoglycemia   
2: Insulin Resistance & Hyperinsulinemia   
3: Metabolic Syndrome & Pre -diabetes   
4: Type 2 Diabetes   
  
Slide  3  
 
After not eating for several hours, our blood sugar levels should be in the lower range of 
“normal” - about 70 -90mg/dL.    
 When we eat a meal, our blood sugar gradually rises to the upper normal level, about 120 -
140mg/dL. Insulin rises and the PAALS work to uptake, utilize, and store glucose, and in doing so, they gradually lower blood glucose.   
  
Blood sugar levels slowly decline between meals if we are not snacking but stay within a healthy range. Glucagon is released to help stimulate the release of stored fuel supplies and we may get low levels of stress hormones to help glucagon release stores and hold the bottom of 
the range.  Notice  that the curve on the chart is fairly smooth –  no spikes and no crashes.    
  
In this model, we also have metabolic flexibility, so if we don’t get more dietary carbohydrates, we are able to use proteins and fats to produce more energy. We likely have fairly consistent 
energy levels and reduced cravings throughout the day and can  tap into stored fuel, which 
helps us maintain a healthy weight.    
  
Slide  4  
  
 
Stage 1: Reactive Hypoglycemia   
  
In the early stages of dysglycemia, we begin to see sharp swings in blood glucose. When we 
consume a high glycemic meal, our blood glucose shoots up past normal, healthy upper ranges. It is moving so fast  that the body produces excessive amounts of insulin to protect you from the 
damages of hyperglycemia. The body does not know when this rapid increase in glucose will end, so it basically overcorrects by producing excessive amounts of insulin.   
  
Once the glucose consumption stops, the high insulin levels continue to do their work, shuttling 
glucose into cells. This causes a sharp drop in blood glucose, called reactive hypoglycemia.    
  
Understanding that hypoglycemia in this context is caused by the preceding hyperglycemia is so 
important, but it is something many folks don’t always understand, and so the logical answer seems to be to eat more sugar. Although there may be times when eati ng another quick source 
of sugar is necessary, as in the case of an insulin -dependent diabetic who accidentally 
administered too much insulin, for most folks, the answer is to support the body with a more protein and fat- rich diet.    
  
Slide  5  
  
With these early stages of dysglycemia, our cellular insulin response is still working well, and so our fasting glucose levels are still returning to normal most days. This is more of a rollercoaster ride, with sugar highs and crashes rather than constantly elevated glucose, but over the long term, it can contribute to the progression of later stages of dysglycemia.    
  
One of the things that make the rollercoaster so taxing is that the adrenal glands are required to help keep the floor from falling out below us. The increased levels of stress hormones can cause jittery feelings and anxiety, commonly referred to as being “hangry.” So, when we talk about low blood sugar being a form of biochemical stress, this kind of reactive hypoglycemic spell is exactly what we are talking about.    
  
If this glucose crash happens in the night, after we’ve gone to bed following a high glycemic meal and dessert, the increase in adrenal hormones can cause sleep disruptions.    
  
Slide  6   
 Common signs and symptoms of reactive hypoglycemia include:    
 
• Increased cravings for sugar and refined carbohydrates     
• Increased blood pressure    
• Unstable energy levels   
 
• Headaches   
• Mood swings    
• Anxiety   
• Disrupted sleeping   
• Ravenous hunger    
• Feeling light -headed if meals are missed    
• Feeling jittery or shaky between meals    
• Sweating    
• Rapid or irregular heartbeat    
• Reduced cognitive performance   
  
Slide  7  
  
Stage 2: Insulin Resistance & Hyperinsulinemia   
  
After someone has experienced years of hyperglycemic diets and blood sugar spikes and crashes, we can start to see a decreased response by the peripheral cells to insulin’s signal. When this begins to happen, we get the initial rise in glucose, but the ins ulin response does not 
work as well, so we don’t tend to have as immediate of a drop back into the lower ranges as  we 
saw in reactive hypoglycemia.  
 Instead, we see the accumulation of both glucose and insulin in the blood for longer periods of 
time – referred to as hyperglycemia and compensatory hyperinsulinemia. Later stages of 
dysglycemia can still include periods of hypoglycemia, but they tend to b e less common and 
brought on by more drastic changes rather than something someone may experience multiple 
times a day.   
  
I’ll just mention again that we do generally think of insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia 
developing after ongoing blood sugar dysregulation, but other environmental and lifestyle factors can contribute to insulin resistance, which we will discuss late r.   
  
We’ve spoken about some of the impacts of elevated glucose through glycation, but what about hyperinsulinemia? What does it do in the body? Chronically elevated insulin can contribute to several health concerns:   
   
• Elevated blood pressure   
• Dyslipidemia  
• Inflammatory conditions   
• Hormonal dysregulation   
• Fatigue    
• Weight gain   
 
  
Slide  8  
  
We will look at these in more detail as we continue through this module, but I wanted to just 
touch on the weight gain and fatigue, as these are common concerns a client may experience 
and can be early signs that blood glucose regulation could use a little help.   
  
Numerous studies have determined that adult weight gain and obesity are strongly associated with blood sugar dysregulation and insulin resistance. This is no surprise, as we have already discussed the physiological processes that occur when there is excess  glucose in the 
bloodstream and an elevation in insulin. When carbohydrates and sugar are consumed, glucose rises, and insulin follows. Insulin helps us store surplus glucose as an energy reserve in muscle and liver tissue (glycogen).   Insulin also inhibit s the process of lipolysis, or tapping into our 
storage fuels in adipose tissues, and instead stimulates the process known as lipogenesis, or the creation of fatty acids and adipose tissue.  
 Once glycogen stores are maxed out, any excess glucose will be converted into fat, primarily triglycerides. The lipid overflow hypothesis held in the scientific community explains that when the human body’s fat tissue has reached its maximum holding capacity, lipids are then stored as 
visceral fat deep within the abdomen around the vital organs. In insulin -resistant  states, we get 
chronically elevated insulin levels so that this storage signal dominates the metabolic state and the “utilize” signal is blocke d. Taken all together, insulin resistance tends to increase fat mass, 
both subcutaneous and intramuscular deposits throughout the body, as well as visceral fat.   
  
When glucose uptake is impaired, cells may not receive an adequate energy supply. Despite having surplus fuel available, the reduced uptake and utilization can result in fatigue and low 
energy levels. Low energy can lead to reduced activity, further exaspe rating the difficulty with 
converting surplus fuel into energy and maintaining a healthy body weight.     
  
Slide  9  
  
It is easy to think of insulin resistance as the insulin receptor being dysfunctional, but what if we flipped that on its head and said that insulin resistance could be a protective mechanism for cells? Glycolysis in the mitochondria of cells inevitably pr oduces some level of oxidative stress –  
it is the cost of producing energy. If cells become backed up with glucose, it can cause excessive oxidative stress to the mitochondria and cell body. Or, similarly, if there is a problem with the mitochondria, it co uld struggle to handle normal glucose supplies without the production of 
excessive oxidative stress. In this light, insulin resistance can actually be thought of as being part of an antioxidant defense mechanism to protect cells from excessive oxidative damage.    
    
 
Slide  10  
  
Common signs and symptoms of insulin resistance include:    
 
• Increased hunger  
• Increased fatigue and lethargy  
• Increased brain fog and difficulty focusing  
• Increased weight gain, especially in the abdomen  
• Increased blood sugar    
• Increased triglycerides and cholesterol levels   
• Increased blood pressure   
• Hyperpigmentation of the skin, especially around the neck and in the armpits  
• Depression and mood disorders  
• Endocrine imbalances, including thyroid and fertility issues  
• Slow healing   
• Premature aging  
  
Slide  11  
  
Stage 3: Metabolic Syndrome and Prediabetes    
  
Metabolic syndrome and prediabetes are related conditions that share some common features 
and often coexist, but they have distinct characteristics. First, they are both common progressive stages of dysglycemia that develop after ongoing and worsening hy perglycemia and 
hyperinsulinemia.    
  
Metabolic syndrome is a broader condition that encompasses a combination of specific biometrics related to metabolic health, while prediabetes specifically refers to elevated blood glucose levels just below the diagnostic criteria for diabetes. Again, they  often coexist, which is 
why we are including them in the same stage of dysregulation.    
  
Prediabetes is diagnosed when either of the following criteria is met:   
  
• Impaired fasting glucose (IFG): Fasting blood glucose levels between 100 mg/dL 
(5.6 mmol/L) and 125 mg/dL (6.9 mmol/L).   
• Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT): Blood glucose levels measured two hours after 
an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) between 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L) and 199 mg/dL (11.0 mmol/L).   
   
 
Slide  12  
  
Metabolic syndrome is a bit more complicated. It is a cluster of interconnected metabolic 
abnormalities that increase the risk of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes. At the time of this recording, an individual must meet three of the following diagnostic criteria to be 
diagnosed with metabolic syndrome:   
  
• Abdominal obesity: Waste Circumference > 40” male / 35” female   
• Elevated triglycerides (>150mg/dL)   
• Blood Pressure (>130/85 mm/Hg)   
• Elevated fasting glucose (> 100mg/dL)   
• HDL below 50 mg/dL   
  
Each of these biometrics relates directly to the dysfunctions we discussed in hyperglycemia and 
hyperinsulinemia. The increase in serum lipids and elevated blood pressure pose especially significant risks to the cardiovascular system, which is why these are often referred to as cardiometabolic health conditions. In the next video, we will take a closer look at the connections between blood glucose and cardiovascular health.     
  
In addition to the criteria mentioned about signs and symptoms of metabolic syndrome and prediabetes can be very similar to those in insulin resistance. In addition, we also tend to see systemic inflammation and reproductive hormone dysregulation.    
 
Slide  13  
  
Stage 4: Type 2 Diabetes    
Type 2 d iabetes can be thought of as the final stage of dysglycemia. In this model, we started 
with periodically compromised glucose with glycemic spikes followed by reactive hypoglycemia. Then we eventually lost sensitivity to insulin’s signal and developed insul in resistance. Over 
time, the pancreas produces more insulin in an attempt to overcome this resistance and maintain normal blood sugar levels.    
  
Eventually, the increased insulin production may become insufficient to compensate for the insulin resistance, leading to persistent hyperglycemia. In addition to insulin resistance and chronically elevated blood glucose, many people with t ype 2 diabetes often have impaired 
insulin secretion from the pancreas. The beta cells in the pancreas, responsible for producing insulin, lose their ability to produce sufficient amounts of insulin in response to rising blood sugar levels. In some cases, this may lead to  a reliance on exogenous insulin, or other 
medications used to potentize insulin signaling, lower glucose absorption in the intestines, or increase excretion.    
 
  
• Diagnostic criteria:   
o Elevated blood glucose levels (at least one reading above 200 mg/dl or 
11.1 mmol/L in 24 hours)  
o Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) above 6.4   
  
  
Slide  14  
  
Common signs and symptoms of Type 2 Diabetes include:  
• Extreme hunger or thirst  
• Persistent hunger, even after a meal   
• Frequent or increased urination    
• Tingling sensations in the hands or feet   
• Chronic, persistent fatigue   
• Frequent infections  
  
Type 2 d iabetes is a chronic condition, but in many cases, it can be effectively managed,  and its 
effects mitigated through diet and lifestyle changes. While it is generally considered to be a 
lifelong condition once it’s been diagnosed, some individuals can achieve remission or reversal of the disease. We just have to remember that for most p eople, it took a good amount of time 
in the various stages of dysglycemia to reach this point.  
 While a client has every reason to hope to be able to improve glycemic control and even reduce 
their need for medications through diet and lifestyle changes, they must work with a licensed 
healthcare provider to manage these changes. When working with a cl ient who is on a glucose -
lowering medication to lower dietary sugars and increase  nutrients to help improve BSR, you’ll 
want to be sure to instruct them to increase their glucose monitoring and speak with their prescribing physician about the dietary and lifestyle changes they are making. These changes could lead to hypoglycemia if their glucose -lowering medications are not being appropriately 
monitored and adjusted as needed to account for diet and lifestyle modifications.    
 
Slide  15  
   
Now let’s turn our attention to type 1 diabetes, which is a close relative, but very distinct from 
type 2 diabetes and the stages of dysglycemia we just outlined.    
 
Type 1 d iabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune condition characterized by the destruction of 
pancreatic beta cells, which produce insulin. This often results in uncontrolled elevations of 
blood sugar, and individuals suffering from this form of diabetes are often prescrib ed insulin 
injections.    
 
 
This is not a disease caused by insulin resistance in peripheral cells –  it is a disease that begins  
with the loss of insulin production in the pancreas.    
 
While the disease has primarily been thought to be the result of genetic predisposition, 
specifically the HLA class II genes, only a small percentage of those with the specific genetic risk 
go on to develop the disease. One report found that only 5 percent  of those worldwide with the 
HLA genetic risk develop the disease.    
 
As a result, an increased focus has been placed on environmental factors that may contribute 
to the onset of this autoimmune condition. One of the primary contributing factors identified 
by researchers is early life nutrition, especially early exposure to  A1 beta -casein in cow milk, 
which we will discuss in a later video.   
 
 A recent report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the US found that there 
has been a 2% rise annually in T1D in youth (<20) in recent years. The CDC also reported that approximately 28% more Americans have T1D now than were reported in their previous 2017 
report. Unfortunately, T1D is considered a permanent condition with no known cure, but diet and lifestyle modifications can help manage the disease and reduce complications.    
  
Okay, that brings us to the end of this video on stages of dysglycemia. I’ll see you in the upcoming videos for a discussion on dietary and lifestyle factors contributing to blood sugar regulation.    
 
 
References   
 
1. Ahmed S, Cerosaletti K, James E, et al. Standardizing T -Cell Biomarkers in Type 1 
Diabetes: Challenges and Recent Advances. Diabetes . 2019;68(7):1366 -1379. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.2337/db19- 0119   
2. American Diabetes Association. Classification and Diagnosis of diabetes: 
Standards of Medical Care in diabetes —2020. Diabetes Care . 2019;43(Supplement 
1):S14- S31. doi:https://doi.org/10.2337/dc20- s002   
3. CDC. National Diabetes Statistics Report, 2017 Estimates of Diabetes and Its 
Burden in the United States Background .; 2020. 
https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pdfs/data/statistics/national -diabetes -statistics-
report.pdf   
4. da Silva AA, do Carmo JM, Li X, Wang Z, Mouton AJ, Hall JE. Role of 
Hyperinsulinemia and Insulin Resistance in Hypertension: Metabolic Syndrome 
Revisited. Canadian Journal of Cardiology . 2020;36(5):671 -682. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjca.2020.02.066  
 
5. Goldberg IJ. Clinical review 124: Diabetic dyslipidemia: causes and consequences. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001;86(3):965- 971. doi:10.1210/jcem.86.3.7304  
6. Hirano T. Pathophysiology of Diabetic Dyslipidemia. Journal of Atherosclerosis 
and Thrombosis . 2018;25(9):771 -782. doi:https://doi.org/10.5551/jat.rv17023   
7. Hoehn KL, Salmon AB, Hohnen -Behrens C, et al. Insulin resistance is a cellular 
antioxidant defense mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2009;106(42):17787-
17792. doi:10.1073/pnas.0902380106  
8. Maahs DM, West NA, Lawrence JM, Mayer -Davis EJ. Epidemiology of Type 1 
Diabetes. Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North America. 2010;39(3):481 -
497. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecl.2010.05.011  
9. Verkouter I, Noordam R, le Cessie S, et al. The Association between Adult Weight 
Gain and Insulin Resistance at Middle Age: Mediation by Visceral Fat and Liver Fat. 
Journal of Clinical Medicine . 2019;8(10). doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm8101559  
 
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 2, Video 3 
 
Title Slide  1  
  
Slide  2  
  
To better understand how different types of carbohydrates impact our blood sugar, let’s take a 
look at two key ways of accessing carbohydrate -based  foods: glycemic index and glycemic 
load.    
  
The glycemic index (GI) is a scale that measures how quickly and to what degree a carbohydrate -containing food raises blood glucose levels after consumption, compared to a 
reference food (usually pure glucose or white bread).   
  
The GI measures blood glucose after consuming 50 grams of available carbohydrates worth of 
that food. Available carbohydrate means we are only looking at sugars and starch –  not fiber 
since it does not become blood glucose  - so it is total carbohydrate minus fiber.    
  
The actual GI number is attained by ranking the glycemic response to the food on a scale from 0 
to 100 by comparing it to the glycemic response of the reference food, which represents  a GI of 
100.   
  
Slide  3  
  
GI numbers of 70 or above are considered high. These are foods that are rapidly digested and absorbed, leading to a quick and significant increase in blood sugar levels. Examples of high -GI 
foods include white bread, white rice, sugary beverages, and most processed snacks. On the other hand, foods with a low GI, which is 55 or below, are digested and absorbed more slowly, resulting in a slower and smaller rise in blood sugar levels. Low GI f oods include most fruits and 
vegetables, whole grains, legumes, and  nuts.   
      
 
Slide  4  
  
The GI does give us important information about the speed at which glucose enters the 
bloodstream, but GI values have some drawbacks. GI values don’t tell you how many grams of carbohydrates are found in a given serving –  which makes a huge difference.   
 
Because of this, GI can wrongly malign otherwise healthy foods, especially those that involve 
comically large servings to reach 50 grams of available carbohydrates.  For example, you 
would have to 1.5 POUNDS (0.7 KG) of carrots to reach 50 GRAMS of carbohydrates. That is a 
large bag of carrots for one sitting! A large carrot would usually only weigh about .2 lbs. So, 1.5 
pounds of carrots might have a fairly significant impact on blood glucose, but the amount you are like ly to eat is much less.    
  
Slide 5   
To help correct the way the glycemic index (GI) can sometimes distort our perception of a food’s impact on blood sugar, the concept of glycemic load (GL) was developed.  
Glycemic load gives us a more realistic picture by considering both the glycemic index and the 
amount of available  (non -fiber) carbohydrate in a typical serving —not a fixed 50 -gram portion, 
which is what GI is based on.  
The math is fairly simple: Take a food’s GI, multiply it by the grams of non -fiber carbohydrate 
per serving, then divide by 100. The glycemic load is then put  into one of three categories:  
• Low: 10 or less  
• Moderate: 11 to 19  
• High: 20 or more  
Let’s go back to our example of carrots. Boiled, peeled carrots have a glycemic index of 92 —
which sounds high. But one cup of cooked carrots only has about 10 grams of available 
carbohydrate. So the glycemic load is: (92 × 10) ÷ 100 = 9.2  
That puts it in the low glycemic load category. So yes —carrots have a high GI, but they don’t 
significantly spike blood sugar when eaten in realistic portions. That’s the value of glycemic load —it reflects how your body actually responds  to a typical serving.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Slide  6  
  
The glycemic index and glycemic load do a nice job of illustrating the role that food processing 
has played in the epidemic of diabetes in recent decades.    
  
As a general rule, the more processed a food is, the higher its GI will be. For example, quick 
oats, which are pulverized down into small bits of oats, will be digested and absorbed much 
faster than steel -cut or old- fashioned rolled oats.    
  
Another example includes refined cereal grain flours. While whole grains contain the bran, 
germ, and endosperm, refined grains only contain the endosperm, which is the starchy middle 
layer that lacks the fiber, vitamins, minerals, phytochemicals, and healt hy fats that the bran and 
germ contain.    
  
In practice, simply reducing or avoiding products made from refined grain flour is a powerful way to improve blood glucose management. It is a much more moderate approach than cutting out entire food groups, which many clients will appreciate. Plus, when y ou reduce flour in the 
diet in favor of whole food options, you simultaneously remove many other less favorable foods like additives and some of the lower quality polyunsaturated fats and retain more other beneficial nutrients.    
  
Slide  7  
 Another factor that can affect glycemic load is fermentation. Many of you are likely aware of the way that lacto -fermentation transforms sugars into lactic acid. This is somewhat intuitive 
because it is easy to observe with your sense in dairy products, with fermented foods having that sour flavor and less lactose content (less sweetness). What fewer people rea lize is that 
sourdough fermentation of grains also helps dramatically lower the glycemic index and load.    
  
During sourdough fermentation, a mixture of bacteria and yeast transform the sugars and 
starches into carbon dioxide which causes the bread to rise, as well as lactic acid and acetic acid.   
  
Not only does this reduce the amount of total available starch in the food, but the presence of these organic acids also delays the absorption of starch. This is due to the inhibition of amylase enzymes by lactic acid (which breaks  down carbohydrates), while acetic acid delays the gastric 
emptying rate and has additional benefits for metabolism which we will discuss later around the topic of vinegar as a therapeutic agent.    
  
So how meaningful of a difference does fermentation make in this example of sourdough bread? Remember, white bread is considered the benchmark for glycemic index – it is 100, and 
 
it’s the GL 10. The GI of sourdough whole wheat bread is 54 and its GL is 8. On the glycemic 
index, < 55 is defined as low, between 56 and 69 is defined as moderate, and > 70 is considered high, so that means whole wheat sourdough bread falls into the cate gory of a low GI food, 
while white bread marks the top of the scale.    
 
 
This may be why significant intake of breads in some Mediterranean and European diets does  
not seem to correspond with increased rates of metabolic conditions. So, if you or your client wants to include bread in their diet while also doing your best to maintain glycemic control, consider taking advantage of fiber and fermentation by opting for whole -grain sourdough 
bread .    
  
Slide  8  
  
Another factor that influences the GI of foods is the method by which it is cooked.    
  
To better understand the impacts of different cooking methods, let’s compare a boiled sweet potato with a baked sweet potato.    
  
• Moisture Content: Boiling sweet potatoes involves cooking them in water, which helps soften and gelatinize the starch, which means adding water to the structure. This makes 
it more digestible compared to a raw sweet potato, which would increase its GI. However, compared to a baked sweet potato that is cooked in dry air, the boiled potato has a lower GI. That is because dry heat reduces the water content while boiling can 
dilute the carbohydrate content. If you allow the potato to cool, it will have an even 
lower GI because some of the gelatinized starch will become resistant starch. You will see similar trends when looking at grain -based products as well, with pasta  often having 
a lower GI than crackers and bread, and more and more resistant starch accumulating when they are boiled and then cooled.     
 
• Cooking Time: The length of cooking time can affect the GI of foods. Generally, longer cooking times can increase the GI by breaking down the starch further. Boiling sweet potatoes typically requires less cooking time than baking, and this shorter cooking duration can help preserve the structural integrity of the carbohydrates and result in a 
lower GI.   
  
For both of these reasons, most foods have a lower GI when consumed raw.    
  
Slide  9  
  
In summary, GI and GL are both very helpful tools, but keep in mind that both GI and GL have 
limitations. As a summary, you’ll want to remember:      
 
  
•  When eaten together with fat, carbohydrates tend to be digested and absorbed 
more slowly, lowering their actual GI. For example, nourishing fats such as extra 
virgin olive oil, avocado, or walnuts can help to lower the GI of a meal. So, consuming fats can beneficially alter a foods GI.    
 
• Fiber content tends to lower the GI of a food, another reason to eat whole foods 
and foods in their entirety, as fiber is often found in the skin of fruits and vegetables.   
 
• In most cases, the more cooked or processed a food, the higher the GI.   
 
• Some foods may be ranked with a moderate GI like soda, due to the use of 
added fructose or artificial sweeteners instead of real sugar. Fructose has a lower GI because it has to be converted to glucose before it will register per the unit of measurement – glucose. However, fructose does still enter the bloodstream  and can 
cause glycation, so while it is not high on the GI, it can have a less measured, but in some ways outsized impact on blood sugar regulation.    
 
• Finally, response to carbohydrates is highly bioindividual based on factors like 
our microbiome, hormones, activity levels, etc.    
 
• In general, GL is a more useful tool in managing blood sugar regulation .   
  
There are several website online that can give you a quick reference on both GI and GL. One of my favorites is https://glycemicindex.com  from The University of Sydney.   
  
Slide  10  
  
Before we wrap up this video, I want to touch on a closely related concept: total carbohydrates and net carbohydrates. Understanding the difference can be helpful when it comes to reading and understanding food labels to gain a better awareness of one’s carbohydrate intake. Here's what each term means:   
  
• Total Carbohydrates refers to the sum of all types of carbohydrates present in a 
food item. This includes sugars (both naturally occurring and added), starches, and fiber. Because this number includes fiber, it lumps together the carbohydrates that contain absorbable glucose and therefore impact serum glucose and provide a 
source of energy, with those that do not (namely, fiber). So it is the total amount of carbohydrate content in a given serving of food, which is listed on nutrition labels.
   
 
• Net carbohydrates, or "net carbs," are calculated by subtracting the fiber from 
the total carbohydrates. The idea behind this calculation is that because fiber does 
not impact your blood sugar levels like starch and sugar, this number can offer a more accurate number to individuals concerned ab out glucose levels. You have to 
do a little bit of your own math to come up with net carbs, as they are not always 
listed on food labels:   
  
The formula for calculating net carbs is usually:   
 
Net Carbs = Total Carbohydrates - Dietary Fiber - (Certain Sugar Alcohols)   
  
Some people will also subtract sugar alcohols from total carbohydrates to calculate net carbs 
since many of them will have such a relatively small impact on blood sugar, but this is certainly 
a more difficult calculation to make since different sugar alcohols will impact different people differently, and their volume is not always easy to find on a label.    
  
In summary, the main difference between total carbohydrates and net carbohydrates lies in the subtraction of fiber and certain sugar alcohols from the total to obtain the net value, of the amount of carbohydrates that will impact blood sugar. This is often used by low- carb dieters to 
gain a more accurate representation of the carbohydrate intake.    
  
 
References   
 
1. Bahado -Singh PS, Riley CK, Wheatley AO, Lowe HI. Relationship between 
Processing Method and the Glycemic Indices of Ten Sweet Potato (Ipomoea batatas) Cultivars Commonly Consumed in Jamaica. J Nutr Metab . 2011;2011:584832. 
doi:10.1155/2011/584832  
2. Capurso A, Capurso C. The Mediterranean way: why elderly people should eat 
wholewheat sourdough bread—a little -known component of the Mediterranean diet 
and healthy food for elderly adults. Aging Clinical and Experimental Research . 
2019;32(1):1- 5. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s40520- 019-01392- 3  
3. Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition. Guidance For Industry Food 
Labeling Guide. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Published 2019. https://www.fda.gov/regulatory -information/search -fda-guidance -
documents/guidance -industry -food -labeling -guide   
4. Glycemic Index –  Glycemic Index Research and GI News. 
https://glycemicindex.com/   
 
5. Kaur B, Ranawana V, Teh AL, Henry CJ. The Glycemic Potential of White and Red 
Rice Affected by Oil Type and Time of Addition. J Food Sci. 2015;80(10):H2316-
H2321. doi:10.1111/1750- 3841.13070  
6. Oregon State University. Glycemic Index and Glycemic Load. Linus Pauling 
Institute. Published January 2, 2019. https://lpi.oregonstate.edu/mic/food-
beverages/glycemic -index -glycemic -load   
 
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 2, Video 4  
 
  
Title Slide  1  
  
Welcome back. We’ve  covered the importance of managing the glycemic load of our diets, but 
there are several other dietary factors that can contribute to blood sugar dysregulation. In the video, we will explore the role of the microbiome and A1 beta- casein in cow milk.     
 
Slide  2  
 The microbiome is so complex, and its interactions and influences with the host’s gene expression, immune balance, and metabolism are even more complex. When trying to pinpoint  
exactly what microbial profile is associated with blood glucose dysregulation, we find that a 
clear answer that applies to all populations is not really available yet. While the exact microbial 
profile in patients with metabolic syndrome is not fully unde rstood, there are indications of 
distinct differences in the composition of their microbiota compared to those without metabolic syndrome.   
  
One of the more well -established hypotheses in this area is known as "metabolic 
endotoxemia”, and it suggests that increased adiposity and systemic inflammation in metabolic disorders could result from chronic exposure to lipopolysaccharide from overgrowths of gram -
negative  bacteria, and other proinflammatory products from dysbiotic microbes in the 
intestines.    
 While dysbiosis -induced inflammation is thought to contribute to insulin resistance in metabolic 
syndrome, it is also thought that it may contribute to immune dysregulation in the autoimmune process of type 1 d iabetes in some individuals.  
 Numerous studies and systematic reviews have shown significant alterations in the gut microbiome of those diagnosed with T1D and those on the brink of developing T1D compared to healthy individuals. Some of the most common alterations in the gut microbiome  in T1D 
include increased levels of Bacteroides spp and decreased levels of Bifidobacterium, along with many other alterations.    
 
  
 Slide  3  
 
There are several pathways by which intestinal dysbiosis may contribute to insulin resistance and blood sugar dysregulation:   
   
• Inflammation: As we just mentioned, dysbiosis can lead to an increase in 
inflammatory endotoxins, such as lipopolysaccharides (LPS), which can lead to chronic systemic inflammation and impair insulin signaling . 
  
• Barrier Dysfunction: An imbalanced gut microbiome can compromise the 
integrity of the gut barrier, leading to increased intestinal permeability which allows the passage of more inflammatory substances and bacterial byproducts into the bloodstream, further exacerbating the immune responses and inflammation that contributes to insulin resistance.   
 
• Elevated Zonulin: Along with barrier dysfunction, we may see elevated zonulin  
levels which is a commonly used marker of intestinal permeability. Remember, 
zonulin helps regulate the passage of certain molecules through the tight junctions, 
which are like gates that hold the enterocytes in our intestines together. Too much 
zonulin c an promote excessive separation between cells in the intestinal lining. 
Animal studies have shown that elevations in zonulin and intestinal permeability 
often precede  type 1 diabetes. Human studies have confirmed this finding as 
elevated zonulin  levels were seen in approximately 70% of patients with T1D, as well 
as during the period preceding the onset of the disease.   
 
Slide  4  
  
• Short -Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs): Dysbiosis can disrupt the production of SCFAs 
like butyrate, which have been shown to enhance insulin sensitivity and improve glucose metabolism, as well as preserve barrier function.    
 
• Disrupted Bile Acid Metabolism: Bile acids can interact with various metabolic 
pathways, including those involved in glucose metabolism. We learned about secondary bile acid metabolism mediated by gut microbes during our Digestive module. Dysbiotic bile ac id metabolism can negatively influence insulin sensitivity 
and blood sugar regulation.   
 
• Impaired Gut Hormone Regulation: Gut bacteria can influence the production 
and secretion of gut hormones, such as glucagon -like peptide -1 (GLP -1) and peptide 
YY (PYY). As a reminder, GLP -1 promotes insulin release and helps lower blood sugar 
 
levels after a meal. Alterations in gut hormone levels can impair insulin secretion 
and reduce insulin sensitivity.   
 
• Production of Metabolites: Gut bacteria produce various metabolites that can 
affect metabolic health, such as trimethylamine N -oxide which has been associated 
with insulin resistance and an increased risk of cardiovascular disease.    
  
Slide  5  
    
In the module on digestion, we mentioned that the ratio between two major phyla of bacteria, 
Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, was a main area of focus for researchers trying to identify  
microbial profiles more or less associated with specific gastrointestinal disorders. If you’ll recall, 
we found that some disorders were more associated with a higher Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio, while others were associated with lower Firmicutes an d Bacteroidetes ratios. Researchers 
have found similarly mixed results when trying to assess this ratio with regard to metabolic disorders.    
  
Research findings from studies in both animals and humans with metabolic disease suggest that Firmicutes bacteria are more effective at extracting energy from food compared to Bacteroidetes bacteria. This efficiency in energy extraction could contribute to more efficient calorie absorption and weight gain, so as a result, an elevated ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes has often been proposed as a potential indicator of metabolic disorders in the past decade.    
  
If only it were so simple! However  the research has not found consistent results. Several studies 
did not show significant changes in this ratio in individuals with metabolic conditions, and some even found  a decreased Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio was associated with metabolic 
syndrome. There has been a fairly consistent observation that individuals with a higher body weight often have reduced bacterial diversity compared to lean lower body weight, implying that other compositional changes at the family, genus, or species level could be more relevant than the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio.   
  
Another issue that throws off the idea that an increased Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio is a 
reliable marker of metabolic conditions has to do with lipopolysaccharide. As we mentioned, the "metabolic endotoxemia" hypothesis suggests that increased adiposity and systemic inflammation in metabolic condit ions is the result of chronic exposure to lipopolysaccharide 
from gram- negative bacteria. However, the main groups of gram- negative bacteria in the 
human gut belong to the Bacteroides phyla, so the idea that a  relatively higher level of 
Firmicutes and lower Bacteroidetes ratio leads  to metabolic disorders would not align with the 
metabolic endotoxemia hypothesis.   
  
 
Slide  6  
  
So, this ratio has not been entirely set aside and many do still consider  it a potential marker for 
metabolic conditions, but the mixed findings highlight the intricate interactions between 
microbial species and their metabolic effects and underscore the need for further research to 
understand the nuances of these relationships.    
 
There is evidence that dysbiosis, high levels of gram- negative bacteria, and loss of diversity can 
contribute to insulin resistance and blood sugar dysregulation. I think it is safe to say that anything that contributes to negative alterations in the micro biome, which we discussed in 
detail in the digestive module, could potentially contribute to a disturbance in metabolism and 
glucose regulation.    
  
In our module on therapeutic approaches, we will look more at some of the clinical trials using multi -strain  probiotic formulas that found positive results in fasting blood glucose, lipid profile, 
blood pressure, and other inflammatory markers associated with metabolic syndrome and type 
2 diabetes.    
 
Slide  7  
 
We briefly mentioned that early life exposure to A1 beta -casein  in cow milk is linked to the 
development of Type  1 diabetes in genetically susceptible individuals. The primary protein in 
cow’s milk is casein, and most cows produce milk containing both A1 and A2 beta -casein. Sheep 
and goats, on the other hand, only produce A2 beta -casein milk along with certain herds of 
cows of African, Asian, and European descent. Interestingly, human breastmilk  also only 
contains A2 beta -casein.   
 
While A1 and A2 are nearly identical, they differ by a single amino acid at position 67 of the 
beta -casein. A1 beta -casein has a histidine at position 67 while A2 beta- casein contains a 
proline in this position, so we are just swapping out that one amino a cid, but proline in A2 beta -
casein makes a huge difference because it resists hydrolysis and cleavage by our digestive 
enzymes. In contrast, the histidine at position 67 in A1 beta -casein allows cleavage by 
proteolytic enzymes.    
 
The result is that A1 beta -casein releases the opioid -like peptide beta -casomorphin 7 (BCM -7). 
This peptide, or string of amino acids, is resistant to further breakdown. An enzyme called 
Dipeptidyl peptidase -4 (DPP4) is required to break down BCM- 7 and is mainly found within the 
intestinal tract, especially in the ileum. However, BCM -7 has been shown to be capable of 
crossing the intestinal barrier before it is broken down, where it then enters systemic 
circulation intact.    
 
 
So why does the absorption of this BCM- 7 peptide from the A1 beta -casein matter? Well, once 
in circulation, these BCM -7 peptides bind to specific opioid receptors in the central nervous 
system, gastrointestinal tract, and on some immune cells. The BCM -7 acts as an opioid receptor 
agonist, meaning it can activate the receptors. This internal opioid system plays complex roles 
in messaging. Studies have shown the inhibitory effects of beta -casomorphins on immune 
function, which may leave the immune system at higher risk of infections from pathogens, while other studies have shown that BCM- 7 triggers inflammatory immune reactions.    
  
Due to the immaturity of infants’ immune systems and intestinal barrier function, it is thought 
that they are more at risk of BCM- 7 absorption. This is especially concerning for infants who are 
not breastfed during the first few months of life as breastmil k contains specific nutrients that 
aid in the development and maturation of the gut microbiome, intestinal barrier, and immune 
system, although we did learn that some of these digestive issues can be mitigated with 
therapeutic approaches like pre and probi otics.    
  
Slide  8  
   
Perhaps most  interesting for blood glucose regulation, the specific type of opioid receptors that 
BCM -7 docks on, called Mu opioid receptors, are found in the pancreas and Islets of 
Langerhans, which is the epicenter for insulin production. This suggests that BCM- 7, once in 
circulation, likely finds its way to the pancreas and potentially disrupts messaging within the insulin -producing organ.   
  
While T1D is a global disease, numerous analyses have revealed noticeable differences in the 
incidence of the disease between countries. Differences in dietary intake among populations 
have been identified as a primary factor associated with the geographic al variation in T1D, with 
much of the focus being placed on the consumption of A1 beta -casein found in cow dairy.    
 
Slide  9  
  
In a study analyzing data from 19 countries, Finland and Sweden had the highest incidence of 
T1D and the two highest consumption rates of A1 beta -casein per person. In contrast, the 
countries with the lowest incidence of T1D, Venezuela , and Japan, had the lowest consumption 
rate of A1 beta -casein per person.   
 
Another recent systematic review and meta- analysis analyzed 96 studies to determine what 
dietary factors increased the risk of T1D. The results showed that extended breastfeeding of 6 -
12 months (compared to less than 6 months) and avoiding dairy and gluten  for at least the first 
3 months of life correlated to reduced risk of T1D. While breastfeeding was shown to have a 
protective role against developing T1D, increased exposure to cow’s milk in early childhood was 
shown to increase the risk.  
 
   
Slide  10   
 
A recent population -based cohort study that aimed to assess the relationship between the 
duration of breastfeeding and the risk of T1D found that children who were never breastfed 
had twice the risk of developing T1D than children who were breastfed for 12 months.  
   
Other studies found that a variety of acute symptoms, markers of inflammation, and markers of 
autoimmunity were increased with the intake of A1, but not A2 beta -casein . One randomized, 
double -blind control trial enrolled preschoolers ages 5 to 6 who had mild to moderate milk 
intolerance.  
 
The preschoolers were divided into two groups where they would receive either milk containing  
only A2 beta -casein or conventional milk for 5 days. “All subjects then entered a 9 -day washout 
period before commencing phase 2, where subjects crossed over to the other milk product for 
5 days.” The outcomes being measured were changes in GI symptoms, markers of gut 
inflammation, and stool frequency and consistency. The preschoolers in the A2 beta -casein 
group saw significantly less severe gastrointestinal symptoms while the children who consumed 
milk containing A1 beta- casein saw a significant increase  from baseline in markers of 
autoimmunity, infection, and inflammation, along with higher levels of BCM -7.  
A similar double -blinded randomized 2x2 crossover trial included 45 individuals aged 25 -68.  
 
The participants were separated into 2 groups, either receiving A2 or A1 and A2 casein for 2 
weeks. Prior to the initial 2 -week intervention period, the subjects were placed into a washout 
period where the consumption of any dairy product was to be avoided. After the initial 2 -week 
intervention period of either consuming A2 or A1 and A2 milk, the subjects again were placed 
into a 2 -week washout period before being given the opposite milk. The researchers found that 
the consumption of A1 beta -casein was asso ciated with significantly more GI symptoms, 
stomach inflammation, discomfort, and levels of BCM -7. The consumption of A1 beta -casein 
was also associated with reduced transit time, cognitive functioning, and levels of short -chain  
fatty acids.   
 
Slide  11  
 
While on the topic of t ype 1 diabetes, it is worth mentioning that the CDC estimates that in the 
United States, 0.55% of citizens have been diagnosed type 1 diabetes, representing 1.6 to 1.9 
million. That is a lot of individuals, but 37.2 million people have T2DM, representing 11.3 percent of the total population, and we know that does not count the many millions of people living with various stages of dysglycemia like prediabetes.    
  
That means that about 5% of people with diabetes have T1DM while 95% have T2DM.    
 
  
So you are likely to work with more individuals with Type 2 in practice, or individuals who fall 
somewhere within the stages of dysglycemia. Another reason for this is also because it is simply more responsive to diet and lifestyle changes so clients maybe  seeking out nutrition therapy in 
relation to the condition. While much of the information presented here on the differences between A1 and A2 may be of potential benefit for clients who are building families, as well as individuals with dairy intolerance who would like to explore ways to keep some form of dairy in 
their diets.     
  
Okay, we’ll go ahead and wrap up this video and see you in the video for a discussion on 
lifestyle factors contributing to blood sugar dysregulation.     
  
 
   
 
References   
 
1. Araujo R, Borges -Canha M, Pimentel- Nunes P. Microbiota Modulation in Patients 
with Metabolic Syndrome. Nutrients . 2022;14(21):4490. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14214490  
2. Brooke -Taylor S, Dwyer K, Woodford K, Kost  N. Systematic Review of the 
Gastrointestinal Effects of A1 Compared with A2 β -Casein. Advances in Nutrition: An 
International Review Journal . 2017;8(5):739- 748. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3945/an.116.013953   
3. Bullard KM, Cowie CC, Lessem SE, et al. Prevalence of Diagnosed Diabetes in 
Adults by Diabetes Type - United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 
2018;67(12):359 -361. Published 2018 Mar 30. doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6712a2  
4. Chia JSJ, McRae JL, Kukuljan S, et al. A1 beta- casein milk protein and other 
environmental pre -disposing factors for type 1 diabetes. Nutrition & Diabetes . 
2017;7(5):e274- e274. doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/nutd.2017.16  
5. de Goffau MC, Fuentes S, van den Bogert B, et al. Aberrant gut microbiota 
composition at the onset of type 1 diabetes in young children. Diabetologia. 2014;57(8):1569 -1577. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125 -014-3274- 0  
6. Gérard C, Vidal H. Impact of Gut Microbiota on Host Glycemic Control. Frontiers 
in Endocrinology . 2019;10(29). doi:https ://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2019.00029  
7. Han H, Li Y, Fang J, et al. Gut Microbiota and Type 1 Diabetes. International 
Journal of Molecular Sciences . 2018;19(4). 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19040995  
 
8. Jamshidi P, Hasanzadeh S, Tahvildari A, et al. Is there any association between 
gut microbiota and type 1 diabetes? A systematic review. Gut Pathogens . 
2019;11(1). doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/s13099 -019-0332 -7  
9. Jianqin S, Leiming X, Lu X, Yelland GW, Ni J, Clarke AJ. Effects of milk containing 
only A2 beta casein versus milk containing both A1 and A2 beta casein proteins on 
gastrointestinal physiology, symptoms of discomfort, and cognitive behavior of people with self-reported intolerance to traditional cows' milk [published correction 
appears in Nutr J. 2016;15(1):45]. Nutr J . 2016;15:35. Published 2016 Apr 2. 
doi:10.1186/s12937 -016- 0147- z  
10. Lampousi AM, Carlsson S, Löfvenborg JE. Dietary factors and risk of islet 
autoimmunity and type 1 diabetes: a systematic review and meta -analysis. 
EBioMedicine . 2021;72:103633. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103633  
11. Leiva -Gea I, Sánchez -Alcoholado L, Martín -Tejedor B, et al. Gut Microbiota 
Differs in Composition and Functionality Between Children With Type 1 Diabetes and MODY2 and Healthy Control Subjects: A Case -Control Study. Diabetes Care . 
2018;41(11):2385- 2395. doi:https://doi.org/10.2337/dc18- 0253  
12. Lund -Blix NA, Sander SD, Størdal K, et al. Infant Feeding and Risk of Type 1 
Diabetes in Two Large Scandinavian Birth Cohorts. Diabetes Care . 2017;40(7):920 -
927. doi:https://doi.org/10.2337/dc17- 0016   
13. Magne F, Gotteland  M, Gauthier L, et al. The Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes Ratio: A 
Relevant Marker of Gut Dysbiosis in Obese Patients? Nutrients . 2020;12(5):1474. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/nu12051474  
14. Moustafa SR. The immune -opioid axis in prediabetes: predicting prediabetes 
with insulin resistance by plasma interleukin -10 and endomorphin- 2 to kappa -opioid 
receptors ratio. Diabetol Metab Syndr . 2021;13(1):61. Published 2021 Jun 7. 
doi:10.1186/s13098 -021- 00677- w  
15. Ojo O, Feng QQ, Ojo OO, Wang XH. The Role of Dietary Fibre in Modulating Gut 
Microbiota Dysbiosis in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes: A Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis of Randomised Controlled Trials. Nutrients . 2020;12(11):3239. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/nu12113239  
16. Olivares M, Schüppel V, Hassan AM, et al. The Potential Role of the Dipeptidyl 
Peptidase -4-Like Activity From the Gut Microbiota on the Host Health. Frontiers in 
Microbiology . 2018;9. doi:https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.01900  
17. Sadagopan A, Mahmoud A, Begg M, et al. Understanding the Role of the Gut 
Microbiome in Diabetes and Therapeutics Targeting Leaky Gut: A Systematic Review. Cureus . Published online July 8, 2023. doi:https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.41559  
18. Salguero MV, Al- Obaide MAI, Singh R, Siepmann T, Vasylyeva TL. Dysbiosis of 
Gram- negative gut microbiota and the associated serum lipopolysaccharide 
exacerbates inflammation in type 2 diabetic patients with chronic kidney disease. Experimental and Therapeutic Medicine . 2019;18(5):3461 -3469. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2019.7943   
 
19. Sapone A, de Magistris L, Pietzak M, et al. Zonulin Upregulation Is Associated 
With Increased Gut Permeability in Subjects With Type 1 Diabetes and Their 
Relatives. Diabetes . 2006;55(5):1443- 1449. doi:https://doi.org/10.2337/db05- 1593  
20. Secondulfo M, Iafusco D, Carratù R, et al. Ultrastructural mucosal alterations and 
increased intestinal permeability in non -celiac, type I diabetic patients. Digestive and 
Liver Disease: Official Journal of the Italian Society of Gastroenterology and the Italian Association for the Study of the Liver . 2004;36(1):35 -45. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dld.2003.09.016   
21. Taylor SN, Basile LA, Ebeling M, Wagner CL. Intestinal Permeability in Preterm 
Infants by Feeding Type: Mother’s Milk Versus Formula. Breastfeeding Medicine . 
2009;4(1):11 -15. doi:https://doi.org/10.1089/bfm.2008.0114   
22. ul Haq MR, Kapila R, Shandilya UK, Kapila S. Impact of Milk Derived β -
Casomorphins on Physiological Functions and Trends in Research: A Review. International Journal of Food Properties . 2014;17(8):1726 -1741. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/10942912.2012.712077  
23. Verduci E, Mameli C, Amatruda M, et al. Early Nutrition and Risk of Type 1 
Diabetes: The Role of Gut Microbiota. Frontiers in Nutrition . 2020;7. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2020.612377  
24. Watts T, Berti I, Sapone A, et al. Role of the intestinal tight junction modulator 
zonulin in the pathogenesis of type I diabetes in BB diabetic -prone rats. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2005;102(8):2916- 2921. doi:https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0500178102  
25. Woodford KB. Casomorphins and Gliadorphins Have Diverse Systemic Effects 
Spanning Gut, Brain and Internal Organs. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 
2021;18(15):7911. Published 2021 Jul 26. doi:10.3390/ijerph18157911   
26. Xiao L, van’t Land B, van de Worp WRPH, Stahl B, Folkerts G, Garssen J. Early -Life 
Nutritional Factors and Mucosal Immunity in the Development of Autoimmune Diabetes. Frontiers in Immunology . 2017;8. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2017.01219   
27. Xiaoyang S, Zailing  L, Ni J, Yelland G. Effects of Conventional Milk Versus Milk 
Containing Only A2 β -Casein on Digestion in Chinese Children. Journal of Pediatric 
Gastroenterology and Nutrition . 2019;69(3):1. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1097/mpg.0000000000002437   
 
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 2, Video 5  
 
  
Title Slide  1   
  
Now that we have explored some of the ways our dietary intake habits can influence blood sugar regulation, let’s take a look at how other lifestyle factors such as sleep, stress, and physical activity, contribute to dysglycemia.   
  
Slide  2  
  
Blood sugar regulation is one of the many processes within the human body that follow a circadian rhythm. These processes are controlled by a system of recurring 24 -hour internal 
clocks throughout the body.    
  
Our circadian rhythms are mainly controlled  by a central biological clock located in the brain's 
hypothalamus. Apart from the central clock, various organs, including the primary organs of blood sugar regulation like the pancreas, liver, muscle, and adipose tissue (fat cells), have their own internal circadian clocks known as peripheral clocks. We have several different gene families that help regulate circadian rhythms and the expression of these genes is influenced by environmental factors such as the presence or absence of natural light or darkne ss, and 
temperature fluctuations.    
  
As we’ll see, the epigenetic expression of some of these circadian clock genes will have very direct impacts on metabolism and insulin secretion, and the pancreas can be especially responsive to their influence. For instance, the increase in melatonin prod uction in the evenings 
causes the pancreas to reduce the production and secretion of insulin, which we will come back to in a moment.   
  
Also, in peripheral tissues, cellular sensitivity to insulin varies throughout the day due to circadian rhythms. In the morning, cells tend to be more insulin -sensitive , leading to better 
glucose uptake and utilization. As the day progresses, insulin sensitivity decreases, making it slightly harder for cells to take up glucose, which is why consuming food, especially carbohydrates, during the daytime when insulin sensiti vity is higher may lead to better glucose 
control compared to eating late at night.   
 
  
Disruption of circadian rhythms, such as through irregular sleep patterns or night -shift work, is 
linked to insulin resistance, altered glucose metabolism, and an increased risk of metabolic 
disorders like Type 2 Diabetes.   
  
Circadian rhythms are going to underpin the next few topics we discuss: melatonin production, sleep, and meal timing.    
  
Slide  3  
  
Melatonin is synthesized in and secreted by the pineal gland of the brain and is considered one of the most reliable makers of circadian rhythms. Its secretion is regulated by the hypothalamus, where the circadian master clock is located. Once released, it  enters the 
bloodstream and travels to different areas of the body, where it locates receptors and stimulates different physiological effects. Its receptors are located in areas such as the brain, retina, cardiovascular system, liver, gallbladder, colon, s kin, kidney, cells of the immune system, 
platelets, adipocytes, and as we mentioned earlier, the pancreas.    
  
The main types of melatonin receptors in humans are the MT1 and MT2 receptors. One of the areas in which both these receptors are found is in the Islets of Langerhans of the pancreas, where insulin and glucagon are produced. When melatonin attaches to the MT1 and MT2 receptors in the pancreas, it inhibits a key internal signaling pathway (cAMP) that is responsible for insulin secretion and the overall health of the pancreatic beta -cells. This leads to an inability 
to properly secrete insulin and metabolize glucose in the later part of the day and evenings, 
demonstrating the importance of eating in line with the circadian rhythms of the metabolis m.  
  
When the sun is up, especially earlier in the day, the body is in its active mode and better able 
to digest and metabolize food, regulate blood sugar, and secrete insulin. Because the body cannot handle digestion and blood sugar regulation as well in the e venings, having a late dinner 
on a regular basis becomes associated with an increased risk for diabetes.   
 
Slide  4  
 This topic is often referred to as chrononutrition, which describes how meal timing, metabolism, and circadian rhythms interact to influence health.    
  
Before the Industrial Revolution , many of the U.S. migrants who came  from Europe maintained 
meal patterns that greatly resembled traditional European practices. Breakfast was consumed either upon awakening or shortly after the morning chores were completed. The midday meal 
referred to as “dinner” was the main meal and was usually consumed anywhere from 11:00 am 
to early or midafternoon when children returned home from school and men returned home 
 
from work, which was commonly farming. The late meal, known as “supper,” was light and 
even optional. Snacking and snack foods were far less common.   
  
After the Industrial Revolution, it became more common for Americans to work away from home as more career opportunities arose, and staying up late into the evening was more compelling with electric light. Breakfast became the optional meal that many eithe r skipped or 
consumed on the go; the midday meal became known as “lunch” and was more of a social occasion with lighter food consumption. The third meal of the day, known as “dinner,” became the main meal of the day that was often consumed later in the eve ning when adults returned 
from working outside the home.   Today, common habits in many countries include a 
carbohydrate -based  snack for breakfast on the go, consuming the largest meal of the day in the 
evening, and snacking late at night before sleep.   
   
Slide  5  
  
Studies have shown that when identical meals were given in the evening and morning, the evening meal resulted in a significantly higher glycemic response in blood sugar.   
  
Other studies have revealed that when the number of calories is nearly identical, those who eat larger meals earlier rather than later in the day have better glucose tolerance and a decreased chance of being overweight.  
  
Overall, making breakfast the largest meal of the day and dinner the smallest meal of the day is linked to improved glucose tolerance, insulin function, lower BMI, and a decreased chance of 
becoming overweight/obes e. 
  
Not only is blood sugar regulation worsened by late -night eating, but also inflammation 
throughout the body, which is one of the many physiological markers of metabolic syndrome, 
prediabetes, and diabete s.  
 
Slide  6  
  
A closely related topic to meal timing is meal frequency. Research has demonstrated the metabolic benefits of consuming food in the form of 2 -3 meals per day, rather than many small 
meals, grazing, or snacks. One study compared two groups consuming equivalent daily food intake, but one group consumed the food in two larger meals in one day, while the other group consumed the food in several small meals throughout the day. The group that had two meals 
experienced greater improvements in insulin sensitivity, reduction in BMI, and reduction in fat accumulation in the liver.    
  
In some ways, this makes intuitive sense when you think about insulin’s message to store fuel. 
 
If we are never giving our bodies a window of low insulin exposure  because we are snacking or 
sipping on a sweetened beverage, we will have a hard time tapping into stores and be more 
likely to lose sensitivity to insulin’s message over time.    
   
We see that intermittent fasting has become a very popular health trend, but more often than not, we see folks skipping breakfast, exercising their fasting window in the morning, and the feeding window at night, but this research on circadian rhythms suppo rts the opposite 
approach.    
  
We'll explore the topics of intermittent fasting and time -restricted  eating in greater detail 
elsewhere in the program. Meanwhile, a great rule of thumb can be found in the ancient proverb, ‘Eat breakfast like a king, lunch like a prince, and dinner like a pauper.’   
  
Slide  7  
  
Another factor that directly influences the regulation of blood glucose levels is sleep. A sleep-deprived state or irregular sleep patterns can contribute to dysfunction in glucose metabolism.   Animal and human studies have demonstrated that inadequate sle ep, late sleep 
timing, artificial exposure to light, and shift work are associated with metabolic dysfunctions such as type 2 diabetes.   
  
Sleep and stress are closely connected. As sleep duration decreases, stress hormones increase, which then contributes to alterations in blood sugar regulation. Past epidemiological studies that included thousands of participants observed a close associatio n between short sleep 
duration and an increased risk of diabetes.   
  
Controlled trials in humans have shown that after just one week of restricting participants to 4 -
5 hours of sleep a night, they begin to develop insulin resistance. Animal studies have shown that when mice are kept awake during their normal sleep period, t hey experience an increase in 
weight and other metabolic disruptions and can even develop diabetes from this sleep disturbance alone.   
 
Slide  8  
  
Shift work in the United States is becoming increasingly more common, with individuals working irregular and prolonged hours, being exposed to artificial light, and having abnormal sleeping patterns. This growing trend is now estimated to include  15-20 percent of the 
workforce in the United States. Overnight shift work leads to the dysregulation of circadian rhythms and has been linked to reduced glucose tolerance and an increased risk of developing 
diabetes.    
  
 
A recent meta -analysis that included 12 studies and 226,652 participants found that shift work 
is strongly associated with an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes. One study included 
in this meta -analysis followed a large number of nurses for 20 ye ars and kept track of their 
frequency of working night shifts. Having this kind of long -term  research study adds a lot of 
strength to the findings since many of these metabolic impacts play out over time. And there are other large studies that back up this finding. One study in the UK that looked at 272,214 participants also found that night shif t workers were more likely to have t ype 2 d iabetes than 
day workers.   
  
Slide  9  
  
As you learned in our section on the adrenal glands, stress and activation of the sympathetic nervous system lead to the release of cortisol, adrenaline  and noradrenaline, which provide the 
body with the energy needed to deal with the stressor by increasing blood sugar levels, heart rate, and heart contractions. These stress hormones stimulate the metabolic process of gluconeogenesis, turning non- carbohyd rate substances like proteins, glycerol, and lactate into 
glucose to deal with the emergency.    
  
We also learned that another physiological change that occurs during times of stress, is that certain cells, especially the cells of the muscles and liver, become resistant to insulin’s signal –  
causing them to ignore the message to uptake the glucose into  the cells. This causes more 
glucose to remain in the blood, which makes it available for brain functioning. Remember, muscle cells can overcome this stress- induced insulin resistance through insulin -independent  
glucose transport when those GLUT4 transporters are stimulated by exercise. However, much 
of today’s modern stress is chronic, and it is not accompanied by exercise to help counteract 
this increase in blood glucose and concurrent insulin resistance.   
  
It is not surprising then that numerous other human studies have demonstrated that elevated cortisol is associated with increased glucose levels, decreased insulin sensitivity, and the development of chronic diseases such as type 2 diabetes. A large, 12 -year study in Australia 
found that moderate to high stress  levels were associated with a 2.3 -fold increase in the risk of 
developing type 2 diabetes only 3 years later.     
  
Slide  10  
  
So, we know now that a sympathetic state or stress response can increase blood glucose, but the relationship goes both ways; hyperglycemia can stimulate the sympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system .  
  
Carbohydrate ingestion (but not protein or fat) can lead to increased sympathetic nerve activity, even in metabolically healthy people. These changes in the nervous system following 
 
carbohydrate ingestion are linked to hyperinsulinemia, because high levels of insulin can cause 
changes in neuronal activation within the autonomic nervous system, shifting the balance towards sympathetic dominance. Some studies have also shown a dose -depe ndent increase in 
circulating norepinephrine levels with acute hyperinsulinemia, meaning that insulin was driving up the adrenal hormone.    
  
Now, to be clear, this is not to say that any carbohydrate consumption is going to cause this sympathetic stress response, especially in healthy people. Rather, we are really talking about a hyperglycemic response to consuming refined carbohydrates and sim ple sugars that can drive 
that hyperinsulinemic state.    
  
 Slide  11  
  
Physical activity results in muscles using glucose for energy and improved blood glucose regulation – that is one of the most solid claims we can make in the world of blood glucose 
regulation. On the other hand, research has shown that being physically inactive is associated with developing insulin resistance and decreased blood glucose regulation in healthy people.    
  
While insulin is the primary signal that cells need to take in glucose to use as energy, muscle contractions during exercise help us dispose of large amounts of glucose.   When I say they can 
help dispose of a lot of glucose, we are talking about up to 100x  higher rates of glucose uptake 
during exercise than while resting, depending on the intensity and duration of the exercise.    
  
We covered glucose uptake in muscles earlier, but as a quick reminder, the mechanism of 
action by which this occurs is through a specific glucose transporter known as GLUT4. While 
GLUT4 is primarily an insulin -dependent glucose transporter, it can also be activated by skeletal 
muscle contractions, making movement one of the best things we can do for our metabolic health.    
 
Slide  12         
   
Beyond the lack of stimulus for GLUT4 transport proteins, there are numerous other mechanisms of action that explain why physical inactivity is so strongly linked to insulin resistance. These include changes in gene expression, reduced functioning of pancr eatic beta 
cells, reduced energy expenditure, increased free radicals and oxidative stress, increased low -
grade inflammation, changes in sex steroid expression, and impairment in mitochondrial function.    
  
 
 
 
 
Slide  13     
  
Pivoting from the topics of sleep, stress, and movement, I want to touch on the topic of 
environmental toxins. The rise in diabetes has paralleled the increased use and release of endocrine disrupting chemicals into the environment. Certain chemicals have been found to 
disrupt blood glucose regulation and promote inflammation, weight gain, insulin resistance, 
and type 2 diabetes. These toxins have been referred to by some researchers as “diabetogens” 
and include:   
  
• Bisphenol A (BPA)   
• Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs)    
• Phthalates   
• Perfluorinated Chemicals (PFCs)   
• Glyphosate   
• Arsenic & Heavy Metals   
• Air Pollution    
  
Slide  14  
 
• Bisphenol A (BPA) - BPAs have been shown to alter insulin secretion, block 
insulin receptor site s.  
  
• POPs - Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) have also been shown to disrupt 
blood glucose regulation48. Studies have found that individuals with the highest 
levels of POPs have a 12 times increased risk of developing T ype 2 D iabetes.    
  
• Phthalates - Phthalates have been shown to disrupt blood glucose control and 
increase the risk of developing Type 2 Diabetes as well.    
  
• Perfluorinated Chemicals (PFCs) –  Similar associations have been found with 
higher levels of PFCs.   
   
Slide  15  
  
Glyphosate - Recent studies in mice found that animals exposed to glyphosate experienced 
alterations in their carbohydrate and glucose metabolizing enzymes and a rise in proinflammatory biomarkers. Researchers found that glyphosate decreased the expression of insulin receptors and GLUT2 glucose transporter in cell membranes.  
 
 
There is also a known concern that high levels of glyphosate exposure can lead to kidney issues, 
and we know that the kidneys play a crucial role in blood sugar regulation through gluconeogenesis, glucose filtration, and glucose reabsorption.    
  
• Arsenic : There is also a strong link between arsenic levels in the body and the 
risk of diabetes. This is thought to be due to arsenic's  ability to damage beta cells of 
the pancreas, which results in a decreased production of insulin.  
    
• Heavy Metals: Similarly, heavy metals like lead, mercury, and cadmium are 
environmental pollutants that can accumulate in the body and adversely affect glucose metabolism by a variety of mechanisms.   
 
• Air Pollution : Exposure to air pollution, particularly fine particulate matter 
(PM2.5) and traffic -related pollutants, has been linked to insulin resistance and an 
increased risk of T ype 2 Diabetes.   
 
Slide  16  
  
Thyroid hormones play a crucial role in regulating metabolism and energy expenditure. When levels are low, it can lead to various metabolic disturbances, including insulin resistance. Several mechanisms contribute to the association between hypothyroidism and insulin resistance:   
 
• Thyroid hormones directly influence insulin secretion and glucose homeostasis, 
and some studies indicate that thyroid hormones also help  maintain the viability and 
growth of beta cells in the pancreas, which are essential for insulin production.  
   
• Thyroid hormones are involved in the regulation of insulin receptor expression 
and function.    
 
• Thyroid hormones influence lipid metabolism in the liver and peripheral tissues. 
In hypothyroidism, there can be an increase in circulating lipids, which can interfere with insulin signaling and contribute to insulin resistance.   
 
• If you will recall from our digestion module, leptin is a hormone that helps 
regulate  appetite and energy expenditure. Increased leptin levels tell the brain that 
we have adequate energy stores and reduce s appetite. Hypothyroidism can lead to 
leptin resistance, which can disrupt energy balance and metabolism.    
 
• Reduced thyroid hormone levels can negatively affect mitochondrial activity, 
leading to decreased cellular energy production and insulin resistance.   
  
 
This is just a short list  of some of the ways that low thyroid function can contribute to insulin 
resistance. While less common, hyperthyroid conditions can also disrupt glucose metabolism 
and insulin signaling.    
  
Slide  17  
 What about genetics? Over 120 genetic variants have been identified to be associated with the 
development of type 2 diabetes. One of the most commonly cited genes that plays a role in blood sugar dysregulation and developing t ype 2 diabetes is the peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor gamma (PPARg) gene. A large meta- analysis and systematic review in the 
Journal of Nature looked at 73 studies and found that a specific variety of the PPARg gene 
known as Pro12Ala variant of PPARg may contribute to a decrease in  T2D susceptibility.    
  
Pro12Ala gene expression is also affected by epigenetic factors like exercise and levels of 
saturated fat and omega -3 fatty acids in the diet.   If the diet features a higher ratio of PUFA:  
SFA, the gene variant is considered protective, but if SFA>PUFA in the diet, this variant is no 
longer protective against diabetes.  
  
This is a great example of the interplay between our genes and our diets that can vary from 
individual to individual.     
 
Another widely recognized way that genes can impact someone’s predisposition toward 
diabetes is through over expression of genes in the liver that lead to abnormally high levels of 
gluconeogenesis.    
 
Slide  18  
  
This concludes our module on blood sugar dysregulation and the factors contributing to it. Next 
week we will explore the impact that blood sugar dysregulation has on the function of other 
body systems and foundations.   
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
References   
 
1. Adam TC, Hasson RE, Ventura EE, et al. Cortisol is negatively associated with 
insulin sensitivity in overweight Latino youth. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2010;95(10):4729- 4735. doi:10.1210/jc.2010- 0322   
2. Aryaeian N, Khorshidi Sedehi S, Arablou T. Polyphenols and their effects on 
diabetes management: A review. Medical Journal of the Islamic Republic of Iran. 2017;31(1):886- 892. doi:https://doi.org/10.14196/mjiri.31.134  
3. Brenta G. Why Can Insulin Resistance Be a Natural Consequence of Thyroid 
Dysfunction? Journal of Thyroid Research . 2011;2011:1 -9. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.4061/2011/152850  
4. Cappuccio FP, D’Elia L, Strazzullo P, Miller MA. Quantity and Quality of Sleep and 
Incidence of Type 2 Diabetes: A systematic review and meta -analysis. Diabetes Care . 
2009;33(2):414- 420. doi:https://doi.org/10.2337/dc09- 1124   
5. Chaker L, Ligthart S, Korevaar TIM, et al. Thyroid function and risk of type 2 
diabetes: a population- based prospective cohort study. BMC Medicine . 2016;14(1). 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916- 016-0693- 4  
6. Crunkhorn S, Patti ME. Links between thyroid hormone action, oxidative 
metabolism, and diabetes risk?. Thyroid . 2008;18(2):227 -237. 
doi:10.1089/thy.2007.0249  
7. Emet M, Ozcan H, Ozel L, Yayla M, Halici Z, Hacimuftuoglu  A. A Review of 
Melatonin, Its Receptors and Drugs. Eurasian J Med. 2016;48(2):135- 141. 
doi:10.5152/eurasianjmed.2015.0267  
8. Gan Y, Yang C, Tong X, et al. Shift work and diabetes mellitus: a meta- analysis of 
observational studies. Occup Environ Med. 2015;72(1):72- 78. doi:10.1136/oemed -
2014 -102150  
9. Garaulet M, Smith CE, Hernández -González T, Lee YC, Ordovás JM. PPARγ 
Pro12Ala interacts with fat intake for obesity and weight loss in a behavioral treatment based on the Mediterranean diet. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research . 
2011;55(12):1771- 1779. doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/mnfr.201100437  
10. Giralt A, Pierre -Damien Denechaud, López -Mejía IC, et al. E2F1 promotes hepatic 
gluconeogenesis and contributes to hyperglycemia during diabetes. Molecular 
Metabolism . 2018;11:104- 112. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2018.02.011   
11. Hamburg NM, McMackin CJ, Huang AL, et al. Physical Inactivity Rapidly Induces 
Insulin Resistance and Microvascular Dysfunction in Healthy Volunteers. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology . 2007;27(12):2650- 2656. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1161/atvbaha.107.153288  
12. Hanlon EC, Van Cauter E. Quantification of sleep behavior and of its impact on 
the cross -talk between the brain and peripheral metabolism. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences . 2011;108(Supplement_3):15609 -15616. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1101338108  
 
13. Harris ML, Oldmeadow  C, Hure A, Luu J, Loxton D, Attia J. Stress increases the 
risk of type 2 diabetes onset in women: A 12 -year longitudinal study using causal 
modelling. PLoS One . 2017;12(2):e0172126. Published 2017 Feb 21. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0172126   
14. He W. Polymorphism and Human Health. 2009;2009:1 -15. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1155/2009/849538   
15. Hutchison AT, Wittert GA, Heilbronn LK. Matching Meals to Body Clocks -Impact 
on Weight and Glucose Metabolism. Nutrients . 2017;9(3):222. Published 2017 Mar 
2. doi:10.3390/nu9030222  
16. Jessen N, Goodyear LJ. Contraction signaling to glucose transport in skeletal 
muscle. Journal of Applied Physiology . 2005;99(1):330- 337. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00175.2005   
17. Jiang P, Turek FW. Timing of meals: when is as critical as what and how much. 
American Journal of Physiology -Endocrinology and Metabolism . 2017;312(5):E369 -
E380. doi:https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00295.201  
18. Kahleova H, Belinova L, Malinska H, et al. Eating two larger meals a day 
(breakfast and lunch) is more effective than six smaller meals in a reduced -energy 
regimen for patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomised crossover study [published 
correction appears in Diabetologia. 2015 Jan;58(1):205]. Diabetologia. 
2014;57(8):1552 -1560. doi:10.1007/s00125- 014-3253 -5  
19. Kanaley JA, Baynard T, Franklin RM, et al. The effects of a glucose load and 
sympathetic challenge on autonomic function in obese women with and without type 2 diabetes mellitus. Metabolism . 2007;56(6):778- 785. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2007.02.001  
20. Kessler K, Hornemann S, Petzke KJ, et al. The effect of diurnal distribution of 
carbohydrates and fat on glycaemic control in humans: a randomized controlled trial. Scientific Reports . 2017;7(1). doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/srep44170  
21. Kim YA, Park JB, Woo MS, Lee SY, Kim HY, Yoo YH. Persistent Organic Pollutant -
Mediated Insulin Resistance. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019;16(3):448. Published 2019 Feb 3. doi:10.3390/ijerph16030448  
22. Kuo T, McQueen A, Chen TC, Wang JC. Regulation of Glucose Homeostasis by 
Glucocorticoids. Adv Exp Med Biol . 2015;872:99- 126. doi:10.1007/978- 1-4939- 2895-
8_5  
23. Marinac CR, Sears DD, Natarajan L, Gallo LC, Breen CI, Patterson RE. Frequency 
and Circadian Timing of Eating May Influence Biomarkers of Inflammation and Insulin Resistance Associated with Breast Cancer Risk. Ashton N, ed. PLOS ONE . 
2015;10(8):e0136240. doi:https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0136240   
24. Moller -Levet CS, Archer SN, Bucca G, et al. Effects of insufficient sleep on 
circadian rhythmicity and expression amplitude of the human blood transcriptome. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 2013;110(12):E1132 -E1141. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1217154110  
 
25. Mukherji A, Kobiita A, Damara M, et al. Shifting eating to the circadian rest phase 
misaligns the peripheral clocks with the master SCN clock and leads to a metabolic 
syndrome. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 2015;112(48):E6691 -
E6698. doi:https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1519807112   
26. Pan A, Schernhammer ES, Sun Q, Hu FB. Rotating night shift work and risk of type 
2 diabetes: two prospective cohort studies in women. PLoS Med . 
2011;8(12):e1001141. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001141  
27. Peschke E. Melatonin, endocrine pancreas and diabetes. J Pineal Res. 
2008;44(1):26- 40. doi:10.1111/j.1600 -079X.2007.00519.x   
28. Peschke E, Bähr I, Mühlbauer E. Melatonin and Pancreatic Islets: 
Interrelationships between Melatonin, Insulin and Glucagon. International Journal of Molecular Sciences . 2013;14(4):6981- 7015. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms14046981  
29. Pihlajamäki J, Schwab U, Kaminska D, et al. Dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids 
and the Pro12Ala polymorphisms of PPARG regulate serum lipids through divergent pathways: a randomized crossover clinical trial. Genes & Nutrition. 2015;10(6). doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s12263- 015-0493- z  
30. Pizzorno J. Is the Diabetes Epidemic Primarily Due to Toxins?. Integr Med 
(Encinitas) . 2016;15(4):8- 17.  
31. Poggiogalle E, Jamshed H, Peterson CM. Circadian regulation of glucose, lipid, 
and energy metabolism in humans. Metabolism . 2018;84:11- 27. 
doi:10.1016/j.metabol.2017.11.017  
32. Prasad M, Gatasheh MK, Alshuniaber MA, et al. Impact of Glyphosate on the 
Development of Insulin Resistance in Experimental Diabetic Rats: Role of NFκB 
Signalling Pathways. Antioxidants . 2022;11(12):2436- 2436. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox11122436  
33. Richter EA, Hargreaves M. Exercise, GLUT4, and Skeletal Muscle Glucose Uptake. 
Physiological Reviews. 2013;93(3):993- 1017. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00038.2012   
34. Sarhangi  N, Sharifi F, Hashemian L, et al. PPARG (Pro12Ala) genetic variant and 
risk of T2DM: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Scientific Reports . 
2020;10(1):12764. doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -020-69363 -7  
35. Seifalian A, Hart A. Circadian Rhythms: Will It Revolutionise the Management of 
Diseases? Journal of Lifestyle Medicine . 2019;9(1):1- 11. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.15280/jlm.2019.9.1.1  
36. Sen Y, Aygun D, Yilmaz E, Ayar A. Children and adolescents with obesity and the 
metabolic syndrome have high circulating cortisol levels. Neuro Endocrinol Lett . 
2008;29(1):141- 145.   
37. Slominski RM, Reiter RJ, Schlabritz -Loutsevitch N, Ostrom RS, Slominski AT. 
Melatonin membrane receptors in peripheral tissues: Distribution and functions. 
 
Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology . 2012;351(2):152 -166. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.2012.01.004   
38. Stenvers DJ, Jongejan A, Atiqi S, et al. Diurnal rhythms in the white adipose tissue 
transcriptome are disturbed in obese individuals with type 2 diabetes compared 
with lean control individuals. Diabetologia. 2019;62(4):704 -716. 
doi:10.1007/s00125 -019- 4813- 5  
39. The Food Timeline: history notes --meals  & holiday entertaining. 
www.foodtimeline.org. Accessed November 21, 2023. http://www.foodtimeline.org/foodfaq7.html   
40. Triplitt CL. Understanding the Kidneys’ Role in Blood Glucose Regulation. AJMC. 
Published 2012. https://www.ajmc.com/view/ace005_12jan_triplitt_s11   
41. Tudurí E, Marroqui L, Dos Santos RS, Quesada I, Fuentes E, Alonso -Magdalena P. 
Timing of Exposure and Bisphenol -A: Implications for Diabetes Development. 
Frontiers in Endocrinology . 2018;9. doi:https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2018.00648  
42. US EPA. National Primary Drinking Water Regulations | US EPA. US EPA. 
Published March 22, 2018. https://www.epa.gov/ground- water -and-drinking -
water/national -primary -drinking -water -regulations   
43. US Government Accountability Office. The Nation’s Fiscal Health: Action Is 
Needed to Address the Federal Government’s Fiscal Future. 2019; GAO -19-314SP. 
https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/698368.pdf   
44. Vetter C, Dashti HS, Lane JM, et al. Night Shift Work, Genetic Risk, and Type 2 
Diabetes in the UK Biobank. Diabetes Care . 2018;41(4):762 -769. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.2337/dc17- 1933  
45. Yaribeygi H, Maleki M, Sathyapalan T, Jamialahmadi T, Sahebkar A. 
Pathophysiology of Physical Inactivity -Dependent Insulin Resistance: A Theoretical 
Mechanistic Review Emphasizing Clinical Evidence. Journal of Diabetes Research. 2021;2021:7796727. doi:https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/7796727  
 
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 3, Video 1  
 
  
Title Slide  1  
  
Welcome! In this module, we will be learning about the impact that blood sugar dysregulation can have on the function of different body systems and other foundations. In this video, we will 
cover the foundations, beginning with Digestion.    
  
Slide  2  
  
We already discussed many of the key relationships between digestion and blood sugar regulation. As a quick refresher on topics we covered:    
  
Increased Incidence of General GI Complaints   
 
• Individuals with both t ype 1 and type 2 diabetes have a higher incidence of 
digestive symptoms, including diarrhea, constipation, bloating, gas, and floating stools. These symptoms were more common the less glycemic levels were managed.     
 
Vagal Nerve and Gastric Motility   
 
• In severe cases, high blood sugar levels can damage nervous tissue in the 
digestive tract, including the vagal nerve. When these digestive nerves are damaged by glycation, individuals may experience difficulty digesting food, bloating, diarrhea, constipati on, swallowing problems, heartburn, and feeling full after just a few 
bites.   Damage to the vagal nerve in particular can cause the muscles of the upper 
gastrointestinal tract to slow down or not move at all. This can delay the rate at which the stomach em pties, known as g astroparesis. In fact, diabetic neuropathy is 
one of the most common known causes of g astroparesis.   
     
 
Migrating Motor Complex   
 
• The MMC is a cyclical pattern of peristaltic movement that clears the GI tract of 
debris during fasting states (or in periods between meals). It occurs every 90 -230 
minutes between eating periods, but when blood glucose levels remain high, the 
cycle length  of the MMC is reduced.    
  
  
Slide  3  
 
Non -Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease   
 
• Unregulated high blood glucose levels over time can lead to n on-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease (NAFLD). NAFLD is associated with an increased risk for 
gastroesophageal reflux disease and other digestive complaints like difficulty digesting dietary fats    
Dysbiosis  
 
• The relationship between the intestinal microbiome and glucose metabolism is a 
very complex one. In our digestion module, we talked a lot about how dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiome can promote insulin resistance and negatively impact the 
hormonal signaling required for glucose metabolism. We learned about alterations in bacterial products like LPS, SCFAs, TMAO, and bile salts, all of which can affect 
glucose metabolism for better or worse. However, it is not all a matter of dysbiosis promo ting glucose dysregulation – it can also go the other way around. Diets high in 
refined sugars and starch can contribute to alterations in the gut microbiome that promote insulin resistance, whereas diets high in fiber, which tend to be less glycemic, can alter the microbiome in a protective way.    
 
Slide  4  
 We’ve already touched on some of the research that points to the ways that inadequate and poor sleep can contribute to reduced glucose control, but this relationship goes the other way. Blood sugar dysregulation, hyperglycemia, and insulin resistance can c ontribute to poor sleep 
through several mechanisms of action.    
  
One of the most common symptoms of hyperglycemia is increased urination. This is the body’s attempt at lowering the glucose levels in the bloodstream. As a result, individuals with hyperglycemia can wake up numerous times throughout the night with an urgency to use the restroom, which disrupts sleep.    
  
 
One of the stages of dysglycemia that is most capable of disrupting sleep is reactive 
hypoglycemia. If blood sugar levels dip below 70 mg/dL while sleeping at night, it is known as nocturnal hypoglycemia. This can especially affect those who skip dinner, e xercise close to 
sleep, consume alcohol in the evenings, or perhaps the biggest culprit - eat a large amount of 
sugar before bed.   Remember, in reactive hypoglycemia, we first get that sharp blood sugar spike, followed by an 
overcorrection that leads to a blood sugar crash, which will cause our stress hormones to become elevated. These stress hormones can cause us to wake up in the middle of the night, 
but other sympto ms can also include nightmares, sweating, racing heartbeat, shaking, clammy 
skin, and/or changes in breathing.    
  
Slide  5  
 
We have already talked about the many ways that stress hormones can cause insulin resistance and also increase blood glucose levels. However, it is also true that dysregulated blood sugar can impact the body’s stress response, especially reactive hypoglyce mia. Let’s take this 
opportunity to focus on this flip side of the coin –  the ways that reactive hypoglycemia can 
place a burden on the hypothalamus -pituitary -adrenal axis, or HPA axis.   
  
Reactive hypoglycemia is sometimes seen in individuals with blood sugar dysregulation following high glycemic meals but can also occur in insulin -dependent  diabetics due to excess 
synthetic insulin medication or, in some people, simply having an excessive secretion of insulin by the pancreas.    
  
In any case, the body views this blood sugar crash  as an emergency, and in response, secretes 
adrenaline and cortisol. This response in stress hormones is the body’s attempt to liberate stored fuel and prevent blood glucose levels from going too low. If this becomes a constant pattern due to an individual  consuming a diet high in refined carbs, let’s say, then the adrenals 
are put under constant demand to respond.  
 If not addressed, this can contribute to dysregulation in the HPA axis. In earlier stages , it may be 
experienced as regular spikes in stress hormones, but over time, can lead to low -stress  
hormones being produced, which is not good either, since we need stress hormones like cortisol in the right dose for wakefulness, immune balance, energy, and much more.    
 
Slide  6  
  
In the medical community, the term used to describe an inadequate production of adrenal 
gland hormones is known as adrenal insufficiency and one of its  most common symptoms is 
hypoglycemia.    
 
  
A recent study aimed at  measuring cortisol levels in type 2 diabetes patients who had been 
admitted to the hospital after a severe hypoglycemic spell due to difficulty managing their 
medications. Researchers found that over 20% of the individuals had an impaired cortisol response.    
  
Other situations when hypoglycemia can occur is when meal frequency is spaced too far apart if the prior meal did not have a well- suited balance of macronutrients for that person, especially 
when someone’s body is not accustomed to these periods of low glucose availability and does 
not have metabolic flexibility to move quickly or smoothly into other energy production 
pathways.    
  
Slide  7   
  
This relationship between blood sugar regulation and stress can manifest in mental health 
concerns and mood dysregulation.   
  
Many studies have found a connection between an increased likelihood of depression, anxiety, and stress with the consumption of foods high on the glycemic index (GI). Some of these studies even accounted for any difference in relevant micronutrients affect ing mental health 
(like B vitamins, amino acids, and certain fatty acids), and still found an association between  
high GI diets and worse mental health outcomes.    
  
The correlation between high glycemic diets and mood dysregulation can be explained by 
several biological mechanisms.    
  
• Reactive hypoglycemia can cause elevated cortisol levels, which can contribute 
to anxiety and mood disturbances.   
 
• Blood sugar fluctuations can disrupt the balance of neurotransmitters in the 
brain, such as serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine. These neurotransmitters 
play a crucial role in regulating mood and emotions. A high glycemic diet may lead to reduced serotonin levels, which is associated with feelings of depression and anxiety.   
 
• Rapid fluctuations in blood sugar levels can disrupt the brain's energy supply, 
affecting cognitive function and mood.   
 
• Finally, high glycemic diets can lead to alterations in the intestinal microbiome 
that can contribute to mental health conditions.    
  
 
 
    
 
References   
 
1. Catanzaro R, Calabrese F, Occhipinti S, et al. Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease 
Increases Risk for Gastroesophageal Reflux Symptoms. Digestive Diseases and Sciences . 2014;59(8):1939- 1945. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10620- 014-3113 -7  
2. Cheatham RA, Roberts SB, Das SK, et al. Long -term effects of provided low and 
high glycemic load low energy diets on mood and cognition. Physiol Behav . 
2009;98(3):374- 379. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2009.06.015   
3. Diabetes and nerve damage: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia. 
medlineplus.gov. https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000693.htm   
4. Drummond JB, Soares BS, Pedrosa W, Ribeiro -Oliveira A Jr. Revisiting peak serum 
cortisol response to insulin- induced hypoglycemia in children. J Endocrinol Invest . 
2021;44(6):1291 -1299. doi:10.1007/s40618- 020-01427- x  
5. Gangwisch JE, Hale L, Garcia L, et al. High glycemic index diet as a risk factor for 
depression: analyses from the Women's Health Initiative. Am J Clin Nutr . 
2015;102(2):454 -463. doi:10.3945/ajcn.114.103846  
6. Haghighatdoost F, Azadbakht L, Keshteli AH, et al. Glycemic index, glycemic load, 
and common psychological disorders. Am J Clin Nutr . 2016;103(1):201 -209. 
doi:10.3945/ajcn.114.105445   
7. Hypoglycemia - Hormonal and Metabolic Disorders. Merck Manuals Consumer 
Version. https://www.merckmanuals.com/home/hormonal -and-metabolic -
disorders/diabetes -mellitus -dm-and-disorders -of-blood -sugar -
metabolism/hypoglycemia  
8. Hypoglycemia: Nocturnal. www.hopkinsmedicine.org. 
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions -and-
diseases/diabetes/hypoglycemia- nocturnal   
9. Rhyu YA, Jang JY, Park S, et al. Impaired Cortisol and Growth Hormone 
Counterregulatory Responses among Severe Hypoglycemic Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Endocrinol Metab (Seoul) . 2019;34(2):187- 194. 
doi:10.3803/EnM.2019.34.2.187  
10. Utzschneider KM, Kratz M, Damman CJ, Hullarg M. Mechanisms Linking the Gut 
Microbiome and Glucose Metabolism. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism . 2016;101(4):1445 -1454. doi:https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2015- 4251.   
 
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 3, Video 2  
 
  
Title Slide  1   
 
Welcome. In this video, we will explore the ways that dysregulated blood sugar can impact other body systems. In this first part, we will look at the cardiovascular system and nervous system.    
 
Slide  2   
  
Of all the other body systems impacted by blood sugar dysregulation, the cardiovascular may be the most directly affected. In an earlier video, we discussed the concept of glycation; the chemical reaction that occurs when glucose molecules bind to proteins or lipids. As the glucose travels through the blood vessels, the proteins and lipids of the endothelial cells of the vascular 
lining are vulnerable to injury an d glycation when exposed to elevated glucose.    
  
We also know that elevated glucose and hyperinsulinemia can promote high blood pressure 
and elevated lipids in the blood.    
 
Slide  3  
    
First, let’s take a look at a few of the mechanisms by which hyperinsulinemia can increase blood 
pressure:    
 
• Sodium Retention: Insulin promotes sodium retention by increasing the 
reabsorption of sodium in the kidneys, resulting in increased fluid volume and ultimately raising blood pressure.   
 
• Activation of the Sympathetic Nervous System: Insulin can stimulate the 
sympathetic nervous system, which causes blood vessels to constrict, leading to an elevation of blood pressure.   
 
• Impaired Nitric Oxide Production: Insulin plays a role in the production and 
release of nitric oxide (NO), a molecule that helps dilate blood vessels, promoting 
 
vasodilation and lowering blood pressure. In hyperinsulinemia, there may be 
impaired production or reduced bioavailability of nitric oxide, leading to decreased vasodilation and increased vascular resistance or rigidity.   
 
• Endothelial Dysfunction: Elevated insulin levels can contribute to endothelial 
dysfunction, which is characterized by impaired function of the endothelium, the inner lining of blood vessels. Endothelial dysfunction can lead to increased production of vasoconstrictors and increased inflammation, which can contribute to 
high blood pressure.   
  
Slide  4  
  
So that was high blood pressure, now what about elevated blood lipids?    
  
Hyperlipidemia is the term used to describe abnormally elevated levels of lipids in the blood. 
This can include both cholesterol and triglycerides. The term dyslipidemia is very similar and just indicates that there is an abnormal distribution of lipids, which can include elevated levels of LDL cholesterol, reduced levels of HDL cholesterol, and elevated triglycerides.   
  
While we know that both cholesterol and triglycerides are incredibly important components of cell membranes and play essential roles in various bodily functions, it is also true chronically elevated levels of certain types of lipids have been associated with a higher risk factor for 
cardiovascular diseases, including atherosclerosis.    
  
Elevated triglycerides are directly related to glucose dysregulation because the body will turn 
excess glucose into triglycerides.  We also see that insulin resistance drives up triglyceride levels 
in the bloodstream  because cells in the liver, muscles , and adipose tissue are having a hard time 
taking them in for utilization or storage.  
 
  
Slide  5  
  
When we are talking about cholesterol, we have two  main types of cholesterol- rich particles:   
 
• High -Density Lipoprotein (HDL) Cholesterol: Often referred to as "good" 
cholesterol, because this particle type helps remove or mop up excess cholesterol from the bloodstream and endothelial lining of the vascular system and transports it 
to the liver for recycling or elimination. Higher levels of HDL cho lesterol are 
associated with a reduced risk of heart disease. This is why you see “low HDL” on the 
list of diagnostic criteria of metabolic syndrome . 
 
 
• Low-Density Lipoprotein (LDL) Cholesterol: This is often called "bad" cholesterol 
because it carries cholesterol from the liver to the body cells.  If there is an excess of 
LDL cholesterol carried on LDL particles floating around in the blood, it can lead to 
the buildup of cholesterol in the arteries, forming plaques that narrow and block blood vessels. This can increase the risk of atherosclerosis ( hardening and narrowing 
of the arteries) and ultimately lead to heart disease or stroke.    
 
Slide  6  
  
We know that this is a more nuanced conversation to be had about LDL cholesterol. Firs t simply 
calling LDL the “bad” cholesterol does not acknowledge its  important roles like delivering 
triglycerides  to cells for energy or helping our immune system fight infections.  It also tends to 
demonize cholesterol itself, but we know that cholesterol is essential for cell membrane 
integrity and serves as a precursor for steroid hormones and bile acids .  
 There is also a concern that if LDL becomes the only marker that is focused on to determine cardiovascular health risks, then we may fail to recognize the  importance of other markers that 
also matter, like high blood glucose, high triglycerides, markers of inflammation and oxidative stress, high homocysteine levels, and others.  
 We won’t be going into a detailed review of LDL particles here in this video, but I do want to highlight one key point related to blood sugar regulation: There are several different LDL particle subtypes and sizes, and some are more clearly involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis than others. The bottom line is that hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia 
promote a  more dangerous  profile of  particle types and sizes and  make the environment where  
these lipids exist more conducive to cardiovascular disease.  
   
Slide  7  
  
Let’s review a few of the mechanisms by which both hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia can promote dyslipidemia and/or hyperlipidemia.    
  
• Increased Lipid Production: Insulin resistance can stimulate the liver to convert 
more glucose into lipids, particularly triglycerides. As other tissues in the body are not able to uptake and utilize the incoming glucose, the liver is forced to go into overdrive synthesizing and rele asing triglycerides into the bloodstream for storage.   
  
• Dysregulated Lipid Storage: Insulin resistance can impair the normal storage of 
lipids in adipose tissue. Adipose tissue serves as a reservoir for excess triglycerides, helping to maintain healthy lipid levels in the bloodstream. However, in insulin 
 
resistance, adipose tissue may become less efficient at storing lipids, leading to 
increased release of fatty acids and elevated triglyceride levels in the bloodstream. This is like a double whammy –  the increase in lipid production combined with 
impaired storage. To deal with this confluence of dysfunction, the body will begin to 
increase ectopic fat deposition. Ectopic fat occurs when the body deposits triglycerides in tissues other than adipose tissue like the liver, skeletal muscle, heart, and pancreas,  which normally would only have very small amounts. This is where we 
begin to see conditions like fatty liver disease.   
 
• Altered Lipoprotein Metabolism: Insulin helps regulate the production and 
breakdown of lipoproteins, including low- density lipoprotein (LDL) and high- density 
lipoprotein (HDL). In insulin resistance, there is often an increase in LDL production and a decrease in HDL production, leading to an unfavorable lipid profile that contri butes to hyperlipidemia.   
 
• Impaired Lipid Oxidation: High levels of insulin can block the enzymes needed to 
convert lipids into energy, causing a worsening of the fuel backlog.    
 Taken together, this is an impactful list of mechanisms of action by which hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia can affect cardiovascular health. We could elaborate on this list for days and days and weeks and weeks and years if we had the time because there  are just so many 
connections. These profound connections between our metabolism and our cardiovascular system are why we have the term “cardiometabolic condition.” This really is an appropriate 
term because it points to the fact that these two systems rea lly are inseparable in so many 
ways.    
  
Slide  8  
 
Glycation has long been linked to the development of diabetic neuropathy. Diabetic nerves exhibit excessive glycation in all types of nerve tissues like sensory and motor, and all types of nerve cell components, including the nerve body, axons, dendrites, and even the stroma l 
collagen that surrounds and supports the function of the nerve fibers.    
  
Deposits of advanced glycation end products are also found in Schwann cells, which are a type of glial cell that wrap around certain nerve fibers to create a protective, insulating layer called myelin. This myelin sheath facilitates the rapid conduction of  electrical impulses (action 
potentials) along the axons, increasing the efficiency and speed of nerve signal transmission. Higher levels of AGE deposits are associated with reduced myelination of nerve fibers.    
  
AGEs are also believed to contribute to neuronal cell death through direct toxicity to nerve tissues and the release of inflammatory cytokines that can trigger apoptosis or cell death. 
 
Glycation also leads to impaired regeneration of the supportive tissues surrounding the 
neurons themselves.    
  
Slide  9  
  
Peripheral diabetic neuropathy is the term used to describe nerve damage in people with diabetes and is the most common complication seen in those with diabetes. The prevalence has been estimated to be 7% within one year of diagnosis with diabetes and 50% in those who have had diabetes for over 25 years. This nerve damage can occur in all types of nerves within the peripheral system: motor, sensory, and a utonomic.    
  
Nerves located in the hands, fingers, feet, and toes are primarily impacted by diabetic neuropathy, with symptoms of tingling or burning feelings. If the condition worsens, symptoms can progress to deep pain and even a loss of feeling in these areas. One o f the concerns and 
risks that comes with this is that individuals may be unaware when they touch something sharp 
or too hot and injure themself. Another major concern that stems from severe nerve damage is the risk of amputation, which occurs in 1 -2% of diabetic patients.   
  
Neuropathy can also cross over into the cardiovascular system and digestive system, as nerves 
in the heart and blood vessels can also be damaged in the case of cardiovascular neuropathy and we already mentioned the potential impacts of diabetic neuropathy on nerves of the enteric nervous system and the vagal nerve.    
 
Slide  10  
 
Our eyes are an important part of the sensory division of our nervous system, so it is not 
surprising that blood sugar dysregulation is a significant contributor to vision loss and even blindness. The term used to describe this condition in those with diab etes is diabetic 
retinopathy. This condition is now the leading cause of blindness in  working -age people.   
  
In the eye, the retina detects light and sends signals to the brain through the optic nerve.   Diabetic retinopathy is caused when hyperglycemia damages both the blood vessels and 
nerve tissue in the retina and optic nerve.    
  
Early symptoms of diabetic retinopathy include blurry vision, trouble reading, and difficulty seeing objects far away. If not addressed, symptoms can progress to seeing floating spots, streaks, and even blindness.    
  
Diabetic retinopathy can also lead to other eye conditions, such as macular edema and a type 
of glaucoma. Diabetic macular edema occurs when the damaged blood vessels in the retina 
start to leak fluid into the macula, which is the section of the retina needed for precision and 
 
fine detail, such as driving and reading. It is estimated that 1 in 15 people with diabetes will 
develop macular edema, which can also cause scars in the back of the eye. If these scars pull away, it is known as retinal detachment.    
 
Slide  11  
 Blood sugar dysregulation can also impact brain function and cognitive health. As mentioned earlier, prolonged hyperglycemia can damage blood vessels that carry oxygen throughout the body. If this occurs, the brain may receive too little oxygen -rich blood, resulting in brain 
atrophy, characterized by impaired functioning and death of brain cells. Of course, over time , 
and if severe enough, this can eventually lead to problems with memory and cognition.   
  
Slide  12  
  
There have been many studies published on the association between blood sugar dysregulation and various forms of dementia, including Alzheimer’s disease. One  study enrolled over 1000 
dementia -free adults and tracked their response to glucose tolerance tests and risk for 
developing all- cause dementia and Alzheimer’s disease over a period of 15 years. The 
researchers found that both all -cause dementia and Alzhei mer’s disease were significantly 
higher in individuals with diabetes than those with normal glucose  tolerance.   
  
In fact, Alzheimer’s disease, caused by insulin resistance in the brain, is often referred to as “type 3 diabetes.” This is because many AD patients have blood sugar dysregulation and insulin resistance. Studies have shown that about 80 percent of Alzheime r’s disease patients have Type 
2 Diabetes or impaired fasting glucose.    
  
  
Slide  13  
  
Dr. Dale Bredesen, who is one of the leading experts in successfully treating Alzheimer’s and cognitive decline with a whole -person multifaceted approach, has identified several types of 
AD, with one of them being referred to as “glycotoxic.” He explains that this type is caused by chronic inflammation from high blood glucose levels and a loss of nutritional support due to brain cells becoming less sensitive to insulin.    
  
As discussed in a previous section, glucose is the brain's primary and preferred fuel source. In adults, the brain accounts for ~2% of the body weight, but it consumes ~20% of glucose -derived 
energy making it the main consumer of glucose. For this reason, it is critical for the neurons to receive a continuous and balanced supply of glucose from the blood. Insulin receptors are found in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and frontal cortex, which are the regions in the 
brain involved in learning and memory.  Researchers have found that insulin resistance in the 
 
brain directly correlates with loss of cognitive function. Interestingly, it seems that insulin 
resistance in the brain may have slightly different dynamics than insulin resistance in the 
peripheral tissues, and it is thought that for some people, insulin resistance may begin in the brain before the rest of the body.  This is one reason why nutritional ketosis can benefit 
individuals with cognitive decline –  ketone  bodies  provide an alternative fuel source for the 
brain  that is not blocked by insulin resistance.   
 
Slide  14  
 Insulin signaling is also directly involved in regulating amyloid beta and tau within the brain. The 
excessive build -up of these two proteins is one of the most common and pronounced 
abnormalities in patients suffering from AD. Insulin plays a key role in regulating the 
construction and destruction of these two proteins.    
  
One of the primary enzymes needed to break down and clear away excessive amyloid beta protein is known as the Insulin Degrading Enzyme (IDE). This enzyme is impaired during an insulin -resistant state, which provides one explanation for why the clearance of  amyloid beta is 
hindered in AD patients suffering from blood sugar dysregulation and insulin resistance.    
  
There is also a strong association between insulin and levels of tau in the brain, with the expression of the tau gene and activation of tau protein being regulated by insulin stimulation. There is no surprise then that the brains of those with AD show a s ignificant increase in tau 
protein activity than normal brains.   
  
The build- up of these two proteins then contributes to increased neuroinflammation, oxidative 
stress, and synaptic dysfunction. Synapses allow neurons to communicate with each other and pass messages, both electrical and chemical, throughout the brain. Wit hout the healthy 
functioning of synapses, cognition, memory, and learning can be impaired.   
  
Slide  15  
  
In summary, a state of blood sugar dysregulation, prolonged hyperglycemia, and/or insulin resistance can profoundly impact the brain and its functioning.    
  
Insulin resistance can leave the brain cells deprived of glucose and can impair the proper regulation and clearance of amyloid beta and tau in the brain, all of which are highly associated 
with AD.    
  
Hyperglycemia can increase inflammation and oxidative stress, damage vascular tissue , impair 
blood flow to neurons, and cause neurotoxicity by stimulating inflammatory cytokine production.    
 
  
Overall, these numerous negative effects on the brain, from blood sugar dysregulation, 
hyperglycemia, and/or insulin resistance, contribute to neurodegeneration and reduced brain functioning.   
 In our next video, we will look at another group of highly impacted systems: immune, skeletal, urinary, and endocrine/reproductive systems.     
  
 
  
 
References   
 
1. Blázquez E, Velázquez E, Hurtado -Carneiro V, Ruiz -Albusac JM. Insulin in the 
brain: its pathophysiological implications for States related with central insulin 
resistance, type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer's disease. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) . 
2014;5:161. Published 2014 Oct 9. doi:10.3389/fendo.2014.00161  
2. Bonilha I, Hajduch E, Luchiari B, Nadruz W, Le Goff W, Sposito AC. The Reciprocal 
Relationship between LDL Metabolism and Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Metabolites . 
2021;11(12):807. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo11120807.   
3. CDC. Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias. CDC. Published October 26, 
2020. https://www.cdc.gov/aging/aginginfo/alzheimers.htm   
4. CDC. The Effects of Diabetes on the Brain. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Published May 21, 2022. 
https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/library/features/diabetes -and-your -
brain.html#:~:text=Hyperglycemia%20and%20the%20Brain&text=High%20blood%2
0sugar%20over%20time   
5. Diabetes and nerve damage: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia. 
medlineplus.gov. https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000693.htm   
6. Fioramonti X, Pénicaud L. Carbohydrates and the Brain: Roles and Impact. Feed 
Your Mind -  How Does Nutrition Modulate Brain Function throughout Life? 2019. 
DOI: 10.5772/INTECHOPEN.88366  
7. Janson J, Laedtke T, Parisi JE, O’Brien P, Petersen RC, Butler PC. Increased Risk of 
Type 2 Diabetes in Alzheimer Disease. Diabetes . 2004;53(2):474- 481. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.53.2.474   
8. Kikuchi S, Shinpo K, Takeuchi M, et al. Glycation --a sweet tempter for neuronal 
death. Brain Research Brain Research Reviews . 2003;41(2 -3):306- 323. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/s0165 -0173(02)00273- 4  
 
9. Kleinridders A, Cai W, Cappellucci L, et al. Insulin resistance in brain alters 
dopamine turnover and causes behavioral disorders. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 
2015;112(11):3463- 3468. doi:10.1073/pnas.1500877112  
10. Mergenthaler P, Lindauer U, Dienel GA, Meisel A. Sugar for the brain: the Role of 
Glucose in Physiological and Pathological Brain Function. Trends in Neurosciences . 
2013;36(10):587 -597. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2013.07.001   
11. National Eye Institute. Diabetic Retinopathy | National Eye Institute. Nih.gov. 
Published 2019. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn- about -eye-health/eye- conditions -
and-diseases/diabetic -retinopathy   
12. Nguyen TT, Ta QTH, Nguyen TKO, Nguyen TTD, Van Giau V. Type 3 Diabetes and 
Its Role Implications in Alzheimer’s Disease. International Journal of Molecular 
Sciences . 2020;21(9). doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21093165  
13. Ohara T, Doi Y, Ninomiya T, et al. Glucose tolerance status and risk of dementia 
in the community: the Hisayama study. Neurology . 2011;77(12):1126- 1134. 
doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e31822f0435  
14. Rhea EM, Banks WA, Raber J. Insulin Resistance in Peripheral Tissues and the 
Brain: A Tale of Two Sites. Biomedicines . 2022;10(7):1582. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines10071582  
15. Sędzikowska A, Szablewski L. Insulin and Insulin Resistance in Alzheimer’s 
Disease. International Journal of Molecular Sciences . 2021;22(18):9987. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22189987  
16. Shukla UV, Tripathy K. Diabetic Retinopathy. PubMed. Published 2020. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK560805/   
17. Snel M, Jonker JT, Schoones J, et al. Ectopic Fat and Insulin Resistance: 
Pathophysiology and Effect of Diet and Lifestyle Interventions. International Journal of Endocrinology . 2012;2012:1 -18. doi:https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/983814  
18. The Six Types of Alzheimer’s Disease. Apollo Health. Published April 14, 2020. 
https://www.apollohealthco.com/the -six-types -of-alzheimers -disease/   
19. Trouwborst I, Bowser SM, Goossens GH, Blaak EE. Ectopic Fat Accumulation in 
Distinct Insulin Resistant Phenotypes; Targets for Personalized Nutritional 
Interventions. Frontiers in Nutrition . 2018;5. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2018.00077  
20. Wei Z, Koya J, Reznik SE. Insulin Resistance Exacerbates Alzheimer Disease via 
Multiple Mechanisms. Frontiers in Neuroscience . 2021;15. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2021.687157   
21. Yagihashi S, Mizukami H, Sugimoto K. Mechanism of diabetic neuropathy: Where 
are we now and where to go?. J Diabetes Investig . 2011;2(1):18 -32. 
doi:10.1111/j.2040- 1124.2010.00070.x   
22. Zhou MS, Wang A, Yu H. Link between insulin resistance and hypertension: What 
is the evidence from evolutionary biology? Diabetology & Metabolic Syndrome . 
2014;6(1). doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/1758- 5996 -6-12  
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 3, Video 3 
 
  
Title Slide  1  
 Welcome back. We’ve reviewed some of the key connections between blood sugar dysregulation and our other foundations as well as the cardiovascular and nervous systems. Now let’s look at a few more of the most connected and highly impacted systems: immune, endocrine and reproductive, urinary, and skeletal systems.    
 
Slide  2   
   
Both metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes are associated with chronic low -grade 
inflammation, often referred to as "meta- inflammation." This state of persistent inflammation 
is both a driver and a result of blood sugar dysregulation. In other words, the connection goes 
both ways; as chroni c inflammation from any cause can impair insulin signaling and disrupt 
metabolism, so can elevated levels of glucose and free fatty acids in the bloodstream stimulate inflammation.    
  
Slide  3  
  
Chronic inflammation can also impair immune responses and weaken the body's ability to defend against infections. Individuals with type 2 diabetes are more susceptible to certain infections, including urinary tract infections, skin infections, and respiratory infections. This is likely due to several factors. First many of these infections can thrive off an abundant supply of 
glucose. Viruses manipulate glucose metabolism to increase available energy and promote their own reproduction.    
   Also, the function of certain immune cells, such as T cells and macrophages, can be compromised in individuals with metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. These cells play critical roles in recognizing and eliminating pathogens. However, in diabetic conditions, immune cells may exhibit reduced activity and impaired ability to recognize and combat infections effectively.   
  
 
Chronically elevated blood glucose can also hinder the body's ability to heal wounds properly. 
Elevated blood sugar levels can impair blood flow to the wound site, reduce immune cell migration, and impede the production of growth factors necessary for tiss ue repair. As a result, 
wounds may take longer to heal and become more prone to infection.   
  
There is evidence suggesting a link between metabolic syndrome/ type 2 diabetes and an 
increased risk of developing autoimmune diseases. The exact mechanisms behind this association are complex but related to the other drivers of chronic inflammation and immune dysregulation we’ve mentioned here.    
  
Slide  4  
   We can’t really talk about blood sugar regulation and endocrine balance as two separate things 
since blood sugar is regulated by endocrine hormones. The endocrine system is incredibly 
complex and each endocrine axis influences the others –  it is all very much connected. The 
relationships tend to be multidirectional, rather than one -directional . Drawing out all the 
different relationships would create a bewildering web of connecting lines with arrows pointing every way.  So, a full review of all the different connections between blood sugar regulation is 
beyond the scope of the module, but it is a great area to bookmark and come back to for continued education if hormonal balance is an area of special interest for you.  
 For now, we will review a few of the top connections that tend to be most clinically relevant in practice. As a reminder, if someone is experiencing hormonal dysregulation of any sort, it is not within our scope to try to diagnose that condition or try to treat it directly, but hopefully , this 
section will help you realize how powerful healthy blood sugar regulation can be for endocrine health - and helping someone find their way toward better blood sugar balance IS well within 
our wheelhouse!    
  
Slide  5  
  
In our section on contributing factors for blood sugar dysregulation, we noted that thyroid conditions can promote insulin resistance. The reverse is also true -  insulin resistance has been 
associated with alterations in thyroid hormone levels and function. Studies have sho wn a link 
between insulin resistance and subclinical hypothyroidism, with a significant reduction in the conversation of less active T4 to active T3, an overall deficiency in T3, and an increased conversion of T4 to reverse T3, which acts like a brake on i ntracellular T3 activity.    
 
Slide  6  
  
Insulin resistance can also affect sex hormone levels, including estrogen, testosterone, and progesterone.    
 
  
Androgens are a group of hormones produced in small amounts in females, but larger amounts 
in males. The most widely recognized androgen is testosterone, which is responsible for the 
development of male sex characteristics. Aromatase is an enzyme that converts androgens like testosterone into estrogens. Insulin resistance can increase aromatase act ivity, leading to 
higher estrogen production. This can lead to an imbalance between estrogen and other hormones, such as testosterone and progesterone in both males and females.    
 
Slide  7  
 In males, insulin resistance can directly lead to lower levels of testosterone. However, in some females, insulin resistance can be related to high levels of androgens, which can disrupt menstrual cycles and play a role in the development of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).   
  
It is important to note that the full cause of PCOS is complex and research is still working to understand the interplay with genetics and metabolic abnormalities in its development, but insulin resistance is considered to play a significant role. For inst ance, insulin stimulates theca 
cells in the ovaries to generate and release androgens. Abnormally high insulin levels in the context of insulin resistance can stimulate excessive testosterone synthesis in the ovary, a defining characteristic of PCOS. At the same time, it can inhibit the synthesis of sex hormone -
binding globulin in the liver.    
  
Sex hormone -binding globulin (SHBG) is a protein that binds to sex hormones, including 
estrogen and testosterone, in the bloodstream, regulating their availability to stimulate target tissues. Low levels of SHBG in the blood are associated with high androgen levels, along with metabolic issues such as insulin resistance, hyperandrogenism, and abnormal glucose and lipid metabolism in PCOS patients.   
   
Slide  8  
 Here again, the relationships between estrogen and insulin are not straightforward  or one-
directional . On the one hand, some forms of estrogen help to preserve insulin sensitivity, which 
is why insulin resistance is much more common in females after menopause. However, even though healthy levels of estrogen are thought of as protective against insulin resistance in females, insulin resistance can alter estrogen production and metabolism in problematic ways:   
  
• First, you may remember from our discussion on the PAALs a few weeks back that researchers have come to see adipose tissue as an endocrine tissue –  
not just an inert energy storage tissue. It turns out that adipocytes can 
produce estrogen. Insulin resistance can cause an increase in the production of estrogens in adipose tissues, especially visceral adipose tissue, which can 
 
throw off estrogen metabolism and if levels are high enough, may contribute 
to estrogen- related issues in females like endometriosis and fibroids.    
 
• Blood sugar dysregulation and a high glycemic diet can negatively affect the gut microbiome, potentially altering estrogen metabolism and contributing 
to hormonal imbalances. Remember, we discussed the concept of the 
“estrobolome” and microbial influences on estrogen metabolism back in the Digestion module.     
 
• Finally, the liver plays a crucial role in metabolizing hormones, including estrogen. Elevated blood sugar levels and insulin resistance can impact liver function and impair its ability to efficiently metabolize and eliminate excess 
estrogens from the body.    
 
Slide  9  
   
Type 2 diabetes is recognized as the leading cause of kidney disease, which is often referred to 
as diabetic kidney disease (DKD) or chronic kidney disease (CKD). Diabetes is also a leading contributor to kidney stone formation, end- stage renal disease, and kidney failure.    
  
The CDC estimates that 1 in 3 adults with diabetes has kidney disease, and this is due to the 
damage that prolonged hyperglycemia can cause to blood vessels in the kidneys, which further promotes oxidative stress and inflammation.    
  
The kidneys contain numerous units called nephrons responsible for sorting nutrients from waste and then excreting the waste from the body through the urine. Nephrons  also help to 
reabsorb important nutrients to maintain healthy concentrations of things like electrolytes within the bloodstream.    
  
The nephrons of the kidney have tiny blood vessels, or capillary beds, that receive  large 
amounts of blood under high pressure to help with the process of filtration, reabsorption, and elimination. It is a challenging job that you can imagine is made much more difficult with excessive glucose molecules clogging up the processes.    
  
The kidneys are also largely responsible for the overall regulation of body fluids. When the kidneys’ functioning is impaired, patients often experience swelling, known as edema, because the kidneys' ability to remove excess bodily fluid is diminished.    
  
The kidneys’ ability to filter out sodium is also impaired during renal disease. As a result of the 
excess fluid and sodium, patients with diabetes often develop elevated blood pressure and hypertension.    
 
 
The kidneys play a major role in  convert ing vitamin  D into its active form. Specifically, they 
convert 25‑ hydroxyvitamin  D [25(OH)D] into  the active prohormone form the body uses called 
calcitriol, or 1,25‑ dihydroxyvitamin D [1,25(OH)₂D].  Whether  your vitamin D originated from 
vitamin  D₂ or vitamin  D₃ obtained via UV exposure, diet, or supplements , you are still relying on 
the kidneys to be able to use it most effectively.   
In kidney disease, this conversion can be impaired, leading to reduced calcitriol levels. Lower 
calcitriol means less efficient calcium absorption from the gut and greater risk for bone loss. In 
people with hyperglycemia, this can compound the negative effects high blood sugar already has on bone health.  
Slide  10  
  
Blood sugar dysregulation has also been shown to impact bone metabolism negatively.   
  
One of the key minerals for bone health is magnesium, which is needed to activate vitamin D. 
Vitamin D then goes on to promote calcium absorption. Without a proper balance of magnesium, calcium absorption is impaired.    
  
Studies have shown that individuals suffering from blood sugar dysregulation and hyperglycemia experience an increased excretion of magnesium and decreased serum magnesium levels. Magnesium is needed to metabolize food and glucose into cellular energy. Mag nesium is also needed for the secretion and signaling of insulin. These various physiological 
needs are increased during times of hyperglycemia which is another reason why serum magnesium levels in those with diabetes are often low.    
   
As mentioned in a previous section this week, hyperglycemia and blood sugar dysregulation 
contribute to inflammation, AGE formation, and oxidative stress. These effects disrupt bone metabolism and homeostasis through an increase in osteoclast formation and  bone resorption 
(bone loss). Blood sugar dysregulation and hyperglycemia reduce osteoblast formation and activity. Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) can also have a negative effect on the collagen that makes up bone by reducing its flexibility and strength.    
  
Another concern is that studies have shown that increased sugar intake directly leads to the increased excretion of urinary calcium.    
  
A large systematic review and meta- analysis published in the Nutrition Journal that included 26 
studies and over 124,000 participants investigated the impact of sugar -sweetened beverages 
on bone health. The analysis found a significant association between the consumption of sugar -
sweetened beverages and decreased bone mineral density and increased risk of bone factors.    
 
  
Prolonged hyperglycemia can also contribute to joint pain through increased inflammation, 
oxidative stress, and AGEs. Studies have also shown that type 2 diabetes is significantly associated with increased pain severity in people with osteoarthritis.    
  
This wraps up week 3 of the blood sugar regulation module. Next week we will take all of the 
information learned to discuss how to develop targeted nutrition and lifestyle recommendations for clients in need of blood sugar regulation support.   
   
 
References   
 
1. Ahn H, Park YK. Sugar- sweetened beverage consumption and bone health: a 
systematic review and meta -analysis. Nutrition Journal. 2021;20(1). 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/s12937 -021-00698 -1  
2. Alenazi AM, Obaidat SM, Alshehri MM, et al. Type 2 Diabetes Affects Joint Pain 
Severity in People with Localized Osteoarthritis: A Retrospective Study. Pain Med. 2020;21(5):1025 -1031. doi:10.1093/pm/pnz299   
3. Amorim RG, Guedes GDS, Vasconcelos SML, Santos JCF. Kidney Disease in 
Diabetes Mellitus: Cross -Linking between Hyperglycemia, Redox Imbalance and 
Inflammation [published correction appears in Arq Bras Cardiol. 2019 Aug 08;113(1):182]. Arq Bras Cardiol. 2019;112(5):577- 587. Published 2019 Jun 6. 
doi:10.5935/abc.20190077  
4. Barbagallo M, Dominguez LJ. Magnesium and type 2 diabetes. World J Diabetes. 
2015;6(10):1152 -1157. doi:10.4239/wjd.v6.i10.1152   
5. CDC. Diabetes and Chronic Kidney Disease. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Published 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/managing/diabetes -
kidney -disease.html   
6. Chantalat E, Valera MC, Vaysse C, et al. Estrogen Receptors and Endometriosis. 
Int J Mol Sci. 2020;21(8):2815. Published 2020 Apr 17. doi:10.3390/ijms21082815  
7. Cleveland Clinic. Kidneys: Function, Anatomy, Health & Conditions. Cleveland 
Clinic. Published 2022. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/body/21824 -kidney   
8. Daka B, Rosen T, Jansson PA, Råstam L, Larsson CA, Lindblad U. Inverse 
association between serum insulin and sex hormone -binding globulin in a population 
survey in Sweden. Endocrine Connections. 2013;2(1):18- 22. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1530/ec -12-0057  
9. De Paoli M, Zakharia A, Werstuck GH. The Role of Estrogen in Insulin Resistance: 
A Review of Clinical and Preclinical Data. The American Journal of Pathology . 
2021;191(9):1490- 1498. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2021.05.011  
 
10. Diabetic Kidney Disease | NIDDK. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-
information/diabetes/overview/preventing -problems/diabetic -kidney -
disease#:~:text=Diabetes%20is%20the%20leading%20cause   
11. DiNicolantonio JJ, Mehta V, Zaman SB, O'Keefe JH. Not Salt But Sugar As 
Aetiological In Osteoporosis: A Review. Mo Med . 2018;115(3):247- 252.   
12. Ding H, Zhang J, Zhang F, et al. Resistance to the Insulin and Elevated Level of 
Androgen: A Major Cause of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. Frontiers in Endocrinology . 
2021;12. doi:https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2021.741764  
13. Djurhuus MS, et al. Hyperglycemia Enhances Renal Magnesium Excretion in Type 
1 Diabetic Patients. Scandinavian Journal of Clinical and Laboratory Investigation. 
2000; 60, 403- 409. Doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/003655100750019314  
14. Girdhar K, Powis A, Raisingani A, et al. Viruses and Metabolism: The Effects of 
Viral Infections and Viral Insulins on Host Metabolism. Annual Review of Virology . 
2021;8(1):373- 391. doi:https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -virology -091919- 102416  
15. Jiao H, Xiao E, Graves DT. Diabetes and Its Effect on Bone and Fracture Healing. 
Curr Osteoporos Rep . 2015;13(5):327- 335. doi:10.1007/s11914- 015- 0286- 8  
16. Medina G, Vera- Lastra O, Peralta- Amaro AL, et al. Metabolic syndrome, 
autoimmunity and rheumatic diseases. Pharmacological Research . 2018;133:277-
288. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2018.01.009  
17. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. High Blood 
Pressure & Kidney Disease. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Published March 26, 2019. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-
information/kidney -disease/high -blood -pressure   
18. Oregon State University. Magnesium. Linus Pauling Institute. Published April 23, 
2014. https://lpi.oregonstate.edu/mic/minerals/magnesium  
19. Randolph JF, Kipersztok S, Ayers JW, Ansbacher R, Peegel H, Menon KM. The 
effect of insulin on aromatase activity in isolated human endometrial glands and stroma. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology . 1987;157(6):1534- 1539. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002- 9378(87)80258- 2  
20. Vitamin D: The Kidney Vitamin? National Kidney Foundation. Published August 
12, 2014. https://www.kidney.org/news/kidneyCare/spring10/VitaminD#:~:text=The%20kidne
ys%20have%20an%20important  
21. Voma  C, Romani AM. Role of Magnesium in the Regulation of Hepatic Glucose 
Homeostasis. Medicine.  2014.  DOI: 10.5772/57564  
22. Xing C, Zhang J, Zhao H, He B. Effect of Sex Hormone- Binding Globulin on 
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: Mechanisms, Manifestations, Genetics, and Treatment. International Journal of Women’s Health. 2022;Volume 14:91- 105. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.2147/ijwh.s344542  
 
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 4, Video 1  
 
  
Title Slide  1   
  
Over the last three weeks we have learned about the physiological processes of blood sugar regulation, what factors contribute to its dysregulation, and which systems and functions of the body are impacted by blood sugar dysregulation. In this final week of the blood sugar regulation module, we will focus on identifying targeted nutrition and lifestyle recommendations that support blood sugar balance, beginning with managing glycemic load.    
  
Slide  2  
  
As we have discussed, the glycemic index and glycemic load of carbohydrates are tools to help 
estimate the extent to which specific foods will raise blood sugar levels after eating.    
  
For years, major institutions like the World Health Organization have advised people in 
industrialized countries to base their diets on low -GI foods to prevent the most common 
chronic diseases, such as t ype 2 diabetes and obesity. Research has since backed this 
recommendation by showing that t ype 2 diabetes is often associated with the glycemic index of 
the overall diet.   
  
Recall some of the factors that influence the glycemic index of carbohydrates, including their level of processing (whole fruit vs. fruit juice, whole grains vs. flour), the method by which they are cooked (with water or dry), whether they have been fermented or not, and what they are paired or eaten with. For many clients, simply focusing on the quality of carbohydrates before even trying to shift the total macronutrient balance, can be a great first step in establishing new patterns. You’ll find that many clients will experience significant health benefits from simply  
shifting away from relying on refined carbohydrates like sweeteners and refined flour -based 
products and adding more complex carbohydrates like squash, legumes, tubers, whole fruit, and most especially, really focusing on boosting their portions of low -starch, high -fiber 
vegetables like dark leafy greens, mushrooms, peppers, cucumbers, celery, etc.    
     
 
Slide  3  
  
A helpful way to address this topic with clients is to help them find ways to swap the higher 
glycemic carbohydrates in their diet with lower glycemic alternatives. Here are several examples of what this might look like. For instance, replacing instant oatmeal with steel cut or 
rolled oatmeal, replacing white rice with wild, black, or brown rice, replacing regular white or 
wheat breads and bagels with sprouted whole grain or sourdough bread, replacing crackers 
made with re fined flour with crackers that contain whole nuts and seeds, replacing chips with 
hummus and vegetables —you get the idea. Notice that many of these ideas do not suggest 
completely different substitutions like swapping oatmeal for eggs and sausage. More aggressive 
substitutions may ultimately be the best option for someone, but it can be really helpful to 
include some gradual steps and to find lower glycemic options for similar foods since many people will not be interested in 100% elimination of certain foods. Consider creating a handout/chart for future clients or review your client’s food journal to identify some of  the 
higher glycemic foods that they are consuming on a regular basis, and with their input, brainstorm a list of alternatives that they might be willing to try.    
  
  
Higher GI Carbohydrates   Lower GI Alternatives   
Instant quick oatmeal   Steel -cut or rolled oatmeal   
White rice   Black, wild, or brown rice   
White or wheat bread and bagels   Sprouted 100% whole grain or sourdough 
bread   
Crackers    Crackers made with whole nuts and seeds   
Chips   Hummus and sliced vegetables   
Granola bars   RX Bars   
Sweetened iced tea   Unsweetened tea with lemon   
Corn and potatoes    Broccoli, peppers, zucchini, mushrooms, green 
beans, asparagus, kale, or spinach   
Low-fat, flavored and sweetened yogurts   Plain, full -fat, unsweetened yogurt topped with 
berries and seeds   
Soda and sweetened beverages   Unsweetened seltzer water with lemon   
Commercial baked goods and desserts   Dark chocolate (85% cacao or higher)   
Conventional breakfast cereals   Steel -cut or rolled oatmeal topped with berries 
and seeds   
Fruit juice   Whole piece of fruit   
Sweetened creamers   Unsweetened creamers   
Instant, white, or wheat pasta   Lentil, chickpea, or black bean pasta   
Couscous and millet   Quinoa and barley   
 
Conventional condiments   Unsweetened condiments such as brands like 
Primal Kitchen, Maya Kaimal, & Yai’s Thai   
  
Slide  4  
 
As you become more familiar with glycemic load, you will notice that sugar- sweetened 
beverages and fruit juices can have some of the highest glycemic loads around. That means that they will leave individuals more prone to reactive hypoglycemia in the short  term and increase 
the risk of more advanced stages of dysglycemia in the long term. This is also born out in studies showing that consuming sweetened beverages confers a greater risk of developing type  
2 diabetes than consuming the same total volume of sugar in the form of food.    
  
A large meta -analysis found that people who consumed 1 to 2 sugary drinks per day had a 26% 
greater chance of developing T2DM than people who rarely consume sugary drinks. It is worth noting that this was not just looking at soda –  it also included fruity drinks and sweet energy 
drinks. The researchers noted that high levels of fructose in these beverages compounded the effects of the high glycemic load, worsening the impacts on metabolism.    
  
One of the largest studies demonstrating this connection was The Nurses’ Health Study II, which followed the health of more than 90,000 women from 1991 to 1999.   Nurses who reported 
consuming one or more servings of sugar -sweetened soft drinks or fruit punch per day were 
found to have a twofold increased risk of developing type  2 diabetes compared to those who 
seldom consumed these drinks.   
  
In practical terms, prioritizing the reduction of sweetened beverage intake among clients represents a highly effective approach to balancing blood glucose regulation. When you review a Food and Mood Journal, take note of the sweetened beverages and see if you and your client 
can brainstorm some ideas for how to reduce, replace, and upgrade these products. Some may 
benefit from a cold turkey approach to removing these beverages from their diet, while others may have more success by reducing serving size and  frequency over time. Adding in healthier 
options like sparkling mineral water or unsweetened teas, or even diluting their preferred 
sweetened beverage with things like sparkling water is another great way to look at shifting this 
pattern over time. Of course, some clients may not want to change their drink type , frequency, 
or size, but might be willing to entertain using alternative sweeteners instead, so let’s look at that topic next.    
 
Slide  5  
 When it comes to using sweeteners with blood sugar regulation in mind, we will provide you with a Guide to Sweeteners in your reference materials for this module. For now, I’d like to summarize a few key concepts about sweeteners in general and highlight the most important 
 
sweeteners to avoid.   We are going to categorize these sweeteners into four main groups: 
caloric sweeteners, natural non -caloric sweeteners, sugar alcohols, and artificial sweeteners. Be 
aware that the terms nutritive and non -nutritive sweeteners can be us ed in place of the terms 
caloric and non -caloric sweeteners, so you may find these alternative terms helpful when 
researching the topic.     
  
Slide  6  
  
Caloric Sweeteners:    
 
• Caloric sweeteners are natural sugars or sugar- based substances that contain 
calories, provide a source of energy when consumed, and therefore contribute 
to blood glucose levels and insulin secretion.  
  
• Examples include honey, sucrose (table sugar), maple, fructose, etc.   
  
• Within the category of caloric sweeteners, you will find some have a higher GI than others, and they will contain different ratios of mono and disaccharides.    
 
• We could say that sugar is sugar, and if you consume 20g of simple carbohydrates in the form of table sugar or honey, you are still consuming 20g of simple carbohydrates so the impact is similar. However, there are some differences. In general, a good rule of thumb with caloric sweeteners is t he least 
amount of processing, the better, as they will tend to have more vitamins and minerals, and in many cases, you will find that the less processed options have lower glycemic loads because it would require a much larger volume of the sweetener to reach 20g of carbohydrate. That means you will tend to consume less total sugar, and you will get a better nutrient density profile with more micronutrients relative to carbohydrates per serving.   
 
Slide  7  
  
Natural Non -Caloric Sweeteners:    
 
• Natural non-caloric sweeteners are sugar substitutes derived from plant -based 
sources that do not contain any calories. They are intensely sweet, but their sweetness comes from phytochemicals in the plant extract, rather than actual sugar molecules.   
 
• Examples include stevia and monk fruit extract.    
 
 
• There has been some debate about whether or not the sweet flavor of stevia 
and monk fruit could trigger an insulin response even without an actual sugar present. While there may be very small rises in insulin in a small subset of individuals, more and more  studies have indicated that stevia does not 
contribute to increased glucose and insulin levels to a significant degree, if at all, and may have some beneficial effects on the functioning of pancreatic beta cells and insulin secretion in response to glucos e. Therefore, these are often 
recommended as safe and effective sweetener replacements in the management of type  2 diabetes.    
 
Slide  8  
  
Sugar Alcohols (Polyols):    
 
• Sugar alcohols are carbohydrates with a chemical structure that partially resembles sugar and partially resembles alcohol. They are not entirely non -caloric and will have 
some impact on blood glucose levels, however, it is much lower than traditional caloric sweeteners.    
 
• Common sugar alcohols include xylitol, erythritol, and sorbitol.   
 
• Sugar alcohols have become incredibly popular because they have a flavor that is 
very close to sugar and are widely used in low -carb and keto -dieting communities. 
One of the main areas of concern that has arisen as alternative sweeteners have 
become more p opular in recent years is how they impact the digestive system and 
intestinal microbiome. Researchers have observed a range of effects, including both 
antimicrobial properties with some, and prebiotic properties with others. We will provide more informatio n on this topic in your reference materials.   
 
Slide  9  
   
Many people find that using a mixture of sweeteners for different applications can be a great approach that allows them to periodically enjoy natural sweeteners like honey, maple, or molasses, and other times opt for something like stevia where they won’t notice too much difference. Combining caloric with non- caloric natural sweeteners in the same recipe is another 
way to achieve a flavor profile that hits the mark, while at the same time lowering the glycemic load of the recipe.    
  
However, some people may experience blood sugar swings and cravings when using natural non-caloric sweeteners and sugar alcohols, even though they do not directly contribute to 
glucose in the bloodstream. Why is that?   
 
  
• Many of these alternative sweeteners taste much sweeter than sugar. When 
people consume intensely sweet foods or beverages, it can potentially lead to 
heightened taste sensitivity and a desire for even sweeter foods. You may have heard of this concept in terms of the hyper -palatability of many processed foods, 
where we basically lose our normal taste calibration over time so that natural sugars in foods are less rewarding compared to these super swe et alternatives.    
 
• The perception of sweetness can also influence how the brain responds to food. 
Some individuals may experience cravings or overeat when they consume foods or beverages with alternative sweeteners because the brain is smart and expects calories and energy f rom the sweet taste but doesn't receive them. This can lead to 
an almost subconscious sense of dissatisfaction and cravings for actual sugar and calorie -containing foods.   
 
• People's hormonal responses to alternative sweeteners can vary. Some 
individuals may experience an insulin response to the taste of sweetness, even though these sweeteners do not contain calories. Studies have been mixed on the degree of this insulin respo nse with different sweeteners, and it seems to be 
variable by individual. In instances where there is a significant insulin response, it could lead to hypoglycemia because there is not necessarily a corresponding amount of glucose to clear from the blood, so the insulin release can drive down circulating 
glucose levels. There is also a concern, and you will hear this a lot anecdotally, that 
they could slow weight loss and limit improvements in insulin sensitivity in 
individuals with metabolic conditions.    
  
Some research also suggests that these sweeteners may influence the composition and function of the gut microbiota, which can play a role in metabolism and appetite regulation.    
Again, we will address more of these practical application details in your reference materials.     
  
• Artificial Non -Caloric Sweeteners (see following)   
 
Slide  10  
 Finally, and really in a class of their own, we have artificial non -caloric sweeteners. These are 
synthetic sugar substitutes that provide intense sweetness without adding calories to the diet. They are often used in sugar -free or low -calorie products. Exa mples include aspartame, 
sucralose, and saccharin.    
  
 
While much controversy has surrounded the use of artificial sweeteners since their approval, 
increased research on these products has begun to shed light on their potential negative health consequences.    
  
These chemical products are often hundreds or even thousands of times sweeter than real sugar. Studies have revealed that the intense sweetness can lead to increased production of insulin so that continual use can then eventually contribute to insulin resi stance, especially for 
those with pre -existing metabolic conditions.    
  
Slide  11  
 A recent study divided a group of people with t ype 2 diabetes into two groups. The first group 
included those that used artificial sweeteners and the other group included individuals who did 
not use artificial sweeteners. The researchers discovered that the first group who consumed artificial sweeteners had higher levels of insulin resistance and that the duration of use of artificial sweeteners directly influenced the level of insulin resistance.    
  
Another study revealed that the ingestion of sucralose vs. just water causes a greater increase in blood glucose and insulin levels.    
  
These compounds also share some of the same concerns as we discussed with natural alternative sweeteners in that they do not signal satiety and can cause an increased craving for more food.    
 
Slide  12  
  
Perhaps even more alarming  are the toxicity risks associated with artificial sweeteners.  There 
has been ongoing debate and research regarding the potential link between artificial 
sweeteners and cancer risk. Some animal studies have suggested a possible association 
between high doses of artificial sweeteners and certain types of cancer, but these findings have 
not been  consistently translated to human studies. Regulatory agencies like the FDA have 
concluded that there is no clear evidence to support a direct link between moderate 
consumption of artificial sweeteners and cancer in humans.  However, t he International Agency 
for Research on Cancer and the World Health Organization classifies aspartame as possibly carcinogenic to humans and states that more studies are needed and  recommends limiting  
daily intake to 40 mg/kg body weight . 
High consumption of aspartame has also been  linked to headaches, mood disorders, and 
neurological issues in susceptible  individuals.  Another concerning finding is that artificial 
 
sweeteners can reduce glycemic control by altering the gut microbiome. Numerous human and 
animal studies have demonstrated this effect.   
  
In a 2022 randomized controlled trial, 120 healthy adults were assigned to different groups and given sac charin, sucralose, aspartame, or stevia in doses lower than the acceptable daily intake 
for 2 weeks. There were also control groups that received sachets containing glucose or a placebo. The researchers found that s accharin  and sucralose significantly impair glycemic 
responses and promote d glucose intolerance. In an interesting twist, the researchers 
transferred fecal microbiome samples from the human  participants  to metabolically healthy 
mice , which caused the mice to develop  similar glycemic responses to those observed in the 
corresponding humans, further implicating the microbiome in these glycemic alterations.   
  
Slide  13  
 
The different effects of sweeteners on human health is a pretty dense topic and new products and new research are coming out all the time. We encourage each of you to keep up with the 
science by reading new peer -reviewed scientific studies. Meanwhile, we can say with 
confidence that artificial sweeteners are best avoided. Of course, we all want a little sweetness in our lives, but in general, we should try to keep our added sweeteners to a minimum and try to recalibrate our sweet taste so that we can appreciate more subtle sources of sweetness in whole foods. Expanding our appreciation for other bitter , sour, and savory flavors can also help 
reduce the degree to which we rely on sweet foods for an exciting food experience. When clients do want sweetener options, there are plenty of choices between natural caloric sweeteners, natural non -caloric sweetene rs, and sugar alcohols to accommodate most people’s 
needs and preferences.    
  
 
References   
 
1. Ajami M, Seyfi M, Abdollah Pouri Hosseini F, et al. Effects of stevia on glycemic 
and lipid profile of type  2 diabetic patients: A randomized controlled trial. Avicenna J 
Phytomed . 2020;10(2):118- 127.   
2. Boston 677 HA, Ma 02115 +1495 -1000. Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar. The 
Nutrition Source. Published August 5, 2013. https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/carbohydrates/carbohydrates -and-
blood -sugar   
 
3. DIET, NUTRITION and the PREVENTION of CHRONIC DISEASES . 
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/42665/WHO_TRS_916.pdf?seque
nce=1   
4. Malik VS, Popkin BM, Bray GA, Després JP, Willett WC, Hu FB. Sugar -sweetened 
beverages and risk of metabolic syndrome and type  2 diabetes: a meta -analysis. 
Diabetes care . 2010;33(11):2477 -2483. doi:https://doi.org/10.2337/dc10 -1079  
5. Mathur K, Agrawal RK, Nagpure S, Deshpande D. Effect of artificial sweeteners 
on insulin resistance among type -2 diabetes mellitus patients. J Family Med Prim 
Care . 2020;9(1):69- 71. Published 2020 Jan 28. doi:10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_329_19   
6. Pepino MY, Tiemann CD, Patterson BW, Wice BM, Klein S. Sucralose affects 
glycemic and hormonal responses to an oral glucose load. Diabetes Care . 
2013;36(9):2530 -2535. doi:10.2337/dc12 -2221  
7. Pietz J, Kreis R, Rupp A, et al. Large neutral amino acids block phenylalanine 
transport into brain tissue in patients with phenylketonuria. Journal of Clinical 
Investigation. 1999;103(8):1169 -1178. doi:https://doi.org/10.1172/jci5017  
8. Ruiz -Ojeda FJ, Plaza- Díaz J, Sáez -Lara MJ, Gil A. Effects of Sweeteners on the Gut 
Microbiota: A Review of Experimental Studies and Clinical Trials [published correction appears in Adv Nutr. 2020 Mar 1;11(2):468]. Adv Nutr . 
2019;10(suppl_1):S31 -S48. doi:10.1093/advances/nmy03   
9. Schulze MB. Sugar -Sweetened Beverages, Weight Gain, and Incidence of Type  2 
Diabetes in Young and Middle -Aged Women. JAMA . 2004;292(8):927. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.292.8.927   
10. Suez J, Cohen Y, Valdés -Mas R, et al. Personalized microbiome -driven effects of 
non-nutritive sweeteners on human glucose tolerance. Cell . 2022;185(18):3307 -
3328.e19. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2022.07.016   
11. Suez J, Korem T, Zeevi D, et al. Artificial sweeteners induce glucose intolerance 
by altering the gut microbiota. Nature . 2014;514(7521):181- 186. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13793  
12. Tey SL, Salleh NB, Henry J, Forde CG. Effects of aspartame -, monk fruit -, stevia - 
and sucrose -sweetened beverages on postprandial glucose, insulin and energy 
intake. International Journal of Obesity . 2016;41(3):450- 457. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/ijo.2016.225   
13. Wang QP, Lin Y, Zhang L, et al. Sucralose Promotes Food Intake through NPY and 
a Neuronal Fasting Response. Cell Metabolism . 2016;24(1):75 -90. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2016.06.010  
 
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 4, Video 2  
 
  
Title Slide 1  
 Once a client has spent some time focusing on upgrading the quality of their carbohydrates and reducing the glycemic load of their diets, they may also benefit from focusing a bit more on balancing macronutrients, so let’s use this video to cover a few guidelines regarding this topic.    
 
Slide 2   
 Macronutrient balance is an incredibly individual thing, which is why we do not place a strong emphasis on presenting specific caloric ratios within the program. The macronutrient balance that helps someone feel their best and reach their personal goals wi ll vary based on many 
things:   
 
• Age  
• Season of year, and season of life    
• Climate and region   
• Day-to-day variations in activity level and type   
• Digestive function  
• History of metabolic conditions   
• Other medical conditions   
• Genetics   
• Body composition    
• Hormonal cycles   
• Stress levels   
• Bio individual glycemic response to specific foods   
• Microbiome    
• Food intolerances and hypersensitivity    
• Goals and preferences   
• Cultural customs and influences   
    
 
Slide  3  
  
Rather than offering a prescriptive ratio of fats, carbs, and proteins in this module, or a 
restrictive limit on total carbohydrate intake, we want to equip you with a better understanding of metabolism in general so that you can help each unique client find the best balance for 
them.    
  
Practices that help clients become more aware of their body’s feedback, such as measuring 
blood glucose and being attentive to signs and symptoms like sleep, cognitive performance, mood, etc. can also be an excellent way to help develop a sense of personal ized macronutrient 
ranges. We also want to keep in mind the idea of metabolic flexibility and the sense of resilience and well- being that comes when someone can shift their macronutrient balance 
based on different situations.    
  
You will have the opportunity to come back to the topic of macronutrient balance for specific health goals later in the program. In this video, I want to offer a little more information about dietary proteins and fats, and how they can help (or hinder) blo od sugar balance and insulin 
signaling. However, before we dive in, allow me to make a note of total caloric intake.    
  
Slide  4  
 While adjusting macronutrient ratios for metabolic health and weight management can be effective, I just want to be sure we don’t forget about the impact of total caloric intake. Here at the NTA, we have never pushed students or clients to count calories, because we prefer to focus on food quality and centering our relationship with food around how it makes us feel, 
rather than a mathematical formula. We also know, from studying topics like meal timing and 
other factors impacting metabolism, that maintainin g stable glucose, body weight, and energy 
levels is not just a matter of “calories in, calories out.” The type, timing, and context of those calories matter.    
  
However, when we are thinking about insulin sensitivity and metabolic health, we have to keep in mind that at some point, this idea of “calories in, calories out” does come into play. Caloric intakes that far exceed the caloric demands of an individual body – no matter the combination 
of nutrients – can cause issues. This is especially true for carbohydrates and certain forms of 
dietary fats.    
  
Food is many things –  culture, connection, celebration, security, information...and among these 
many things, it is fuel. Too much fuel loaded into any engine over the long term can choke the engine. This is why diets that eliminate almost all carbs and opt  instead for massive amounts of 
dietary fat can still cause issues with sensitivity! Overconsumption of calories in any form can compromise insulin signaling over time. So, this is just a reminder that whether you or your 
 
client feel well and excited about eating lots of fats, proteins, or carbs -  it all comes back to 
balance.    
 
Slide  5  
   
In the past, the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the government have taken more of a 
“calorie is a calorie” approach and recommended a diet fairly high in carbohydrates for the 
treatment of prediabetes and diabetes, placing the focus more squarely on total calories. 
However, recent research has revealed that for many people, a low -carb, high -fat diet is more 
effective at improving insulin resistance along with glucose, A1 C, HDL, and triglycerides levels 
even when consuming an equal number of calories.    
 
We’ve already learned about several reasons that this could be the case. Carbohydrates and 
sugar spike blood sugar and insulin which promotes the formation and storage of body fat. On 
the other hand, dietary fats do not spike blood sugar or insulin, and they can promote satiety 
and help lower hunger cravings. Fats also help to slow down the absorption of sugar from 
carbohydrates into the bloodstream.    
 
In one randomized controlled trial, a low -carbohydrate diet was put head -to-head with a high-
carbohydrate diet, while they controlled dietary proteins and total caloric intake, so both 
groups had the same caloric intake and the only change was in the ratio s of carbs and fats. The 
low-carb diet consisted of 20% carbohydrate, whereas the high -carbohydrate diet consisted of 
60% carbohydrate. Not only did the low -carb diet result in increased weight loss and a higher 
metabolic rate, but the low -carb group also experienced improved blood sugar control and 
insulin resistance and reduced A1C levels. Numerous other studies have shown that individuals 
who followed a low- carb, high -fat diet vs. a standard diet experienced greater weight loss, 
greater reductions in the ir A1C levels, improved blood sugar control, and in some cases, 
reductions in blood sugar -lowering  medications.    
 
Slide  6 
  
This may have you thinking about ketogenic diets, as they are gaining in popularity and will 
likely be the focus of many discussions with clients. A lot of the research looking at low -
carbohydrate high- fat ketogenic diets use ranges around 10% carbohydrate , 25% protein, and 
65% fat. This will generally require net carbohydrates to be below 50 g/day, with a lot of 
ketogenic dieters targeting closer to 20g/day.    
  
A large and growing body of evidence has shown that ketogenic diets can be very effective at 
improving glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity, aiding weight loss, lowering inflammatory 
markers, and even improving lipid metabolism in some individuals.    
  
 
It is worth noting that many people run into other issues while following a ketogenic diet long -
term, like loss of microbiome diversity and difficulty with fat digestion, especially in individuals 
with pre -existing liver/GB issues. If not done with enough care, it can also result in very low 
levels of fiber and phytonutrients and be low in some vitamins and minerals that are more readily attained from carbohydrate -containing plant foods.    
  
As with any dietary pattern, focusing on the quality of food and making sure that there are plenty of low starch, high fiber plant foods like dark leafy greens, mushrooms, herbs and spices, etc. can mitigate some of these potential drawbacks.    
  
Even still, some individuals just don’t feel their best following a ketogenic diet long -term or are 
simply uninterested, unwilling, or unable to follow an eating pattern that involves that degree of restriction regularly. This could be related to other medical issues hormonal imbalances, or just simply personal preferences and values. I have found that a lot of clients with metabolic concerns can benefit from cyclical ketogenic diets, where they periodically enter a phase of more carbohydrate restriction of  20-50g/day lasting a few days or weeks, followed by a period 
of moderate carbohydrate intake of 75 -150g/day. Other clients may prefer to stay with a 
moderate approach to carbohydrate restriction paired with a greater focus on time -restricted 
eating. There  are a lot of ways to tailor these approaches for an individual, and either way, the 
focus should be on consuming fewer processed carbohydrates and expanding their culinary skill set so that they can enjoy finding or preparing balanced meals rich in high -quality, anti-
inflammatory fats, protein, and fiber- rich complex carbohydrates.   
  
Slide  7  
  
When it comes to the impacts of dietary fats on glucose metabolism and insulin signaling, it appears that different types of fats, SFAs, MUFAs, and PUFAs, will have different effects.    
  
There is a significant amount of research, both in animal and human studies, showing the potential for high -fat diets to induce insulin resistance, specifically those high in saturated fat.    
This might sound contradictory to what I was just saying about the metabolic benefits of ketogenic diets. Keep in mind that while ketogenic diets are high in fat, they are not the same thing as non -ketogenic diets that are high in fat (where carbs have not  been dramatically 
restricted), and some ketogenic diets are not necessarily high in saturated fats. When we get into a ketogenic state, other anti -inflammatory mechanisms kick in and mitigate some of these 
potential metabolic issues, especially if the die t includes plenty of low- starch, colorful, fibrous 
plant foods and high- quality sources of omega -3s.   
  
It is important to note some of the limitations of the research implicating saturated fat in insulin resistance. First, in animal studies, many high -fat diets are based on high glycemic corn 
starch as the carbohydrate source, which is devoid of fiber and m any healthful nutrients, and 
 
the saturated fats are often refined from hydrogenated coconut oil, corn oil, and lard. While 
there is an argument that these diets high in ultra -processed foods are analogous to many 
Western diets in humans today, it does not tell us much about the effects of saturated fats within the context of a diet based on whole foods that are also rich in fiber, vitamins, and minerals. Imagine the difference between eating a dark leafy green salad with olive oil and avocado and some grass -fed beef patties with a cup of turmeric coconut milk for dessert, 
compared to a meal of GMO corn starch pellets enriched with a mixture of highly processed, low-quality oils. You could make the macronutrients match, but are they comparable? No, they 
are not.    
  
There are also a lot of confounding factors in observational data in humans. Remember, observational studies are not controlled, so they are just collecting information from people about their diet and lifestyle habits and then looking at their health outc omes and trying to 
draw correlations.   In the field of epidemiology, there is something known as the healthy user 
bias. Individuals who have been trying to follow public health guidelines are often participating in multiple efforts to improve their health,  so it is difficult to isolate one component and 
attribute causality. For example, many individuals who have been consuming diets rich in saturated fat often partake in other diet and lifestyle practices like smoking, drinking alcohol, or consuming their t otal carbohydrates in the form of high glycemic carbs and sugars.   
  
These are just a couple of the issues that can confound the research on saturated fat in the diet.    
 
Slide  8  
  
We know that saturated fats can play many different roles  in our diets and bodies, and they do 
provide us with some important health benefits, so we are not wanting to demonize them. That said, consumption of large amounts of saturated fats has been associated with increased inflammation through several mechanis ms, which can interfere with insulin signaling and 
disrupt the normal response of cells to insulin. Despite some of the potential confounding factors and nuances in the animal trials and observational research, we should not ignore the associations. Mechan istic research has pointed to some of the biochemical pathways that could 
explain the association between diets high in saturated fats and insulin resistance:    
  
• SFA and o mega -6, especially arachidonic acid, can both contribute to 
inflammation through prostaglandin formation. The pro -inflammatory 
prostaglandins generated from SFAs and high levels of o mega -6 are incredibly 
important to many functions in the body, but an imbalance can cause inflammation 
leading to insulin resistance.    
 
 
• Large amounts of saturated fats can alter the intestinal microbiome and increase 
the translocation of lipopolysaccharide into the bloodstream. This effect can be 
greatly mitigated by the presence of fiber.   
 
• High levels of SFA in the bloodstream can activate toll -like receptors on our 
immune cells, which alters gene expression in a pro -inflammatory way and impairs 
metabolism. The activation of certain TLRs has been strongly linked to the progression of metabol ic syndrome, obesity, and type 2 diabetes. Interestingly, one 
of the key reasons that o mega -3 fatty acids, especially DHA, help resolve 
inflammation and protect against metabolic conditions is that they inhibit these toll -
like receptor pathways.    
 
• Excessive saturated fat intake can also lead to the accumulation of fat within 
cells, particularly in tissues like muscle and liver, which can impair cellular function, including insulin signaling. We should note, however, that this can also happen from consuming excess amounts of carbohydrates, as we mentioned in our discussion of ectopic fat and fatty liver disease.    
 
• One of the key roles of dietary fats is that they are incorporated into our cell 
membranes. Saturated fats can affect the composition and fluidity of cell membranes. In general, they provide more stability to cell membranes, but in excess, can cause rigidi ty that can impact the function of membrane -bound proteins, 
including insulin receptors. This can be mitigated to some degree by including other 
higher -quality mono and polyunsaturated fatty acids in the diet.  
 
• Excessive amounts of caloric nutrition, including saturated fats, can cause 
mitochondrial dysfunction and lead to oxidative stress, inflammation, and impaired 
insulin signaling. Because saturated fats pack a lot of caloric density into a small serving size , they can drive up total caloric intake very quickly. This issue tends to be 
mitigated if someone is following a low -carb, high -fat diet in which starch and 
sweeteners are significantly reduced.    
  
As you can see, many of the potential negative effects listed here can be mitigated by controlling the glycemic load and including plenty of fiber, vitamins and minerals, and anti-inflammatory phytochemicals in the diet.   
  
Slide  9  
 
I mentioned omega -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids earlier, and they have been shown to have a 
beneficial effect on insulin sensitivity. Many of the pathways credited for the benefits that 
omega -3s are similar but opposite (beneficial) to those we just mentioned concerning saturated 
 
fat; altering gene expression, improving lipid handling in the liver, reducing inflammation 
through multiple pathways including anti -inflammatory prostaglandin synthesis, lowering toll-
like receptor activation, and increasing insulin receptor function in p eripheral cells.    
 
Slide  10  
 
Dietary Fatty Acid Takeaways:    
 
• Dietary fats can help maintain stable energy levels between meals, lower 
glycemic response to foods, and increase satiety, among many other benefits.  
   
• There is strong evidence  supporting the use of low- carb, high -fat diets in 
conditions like metabolic syndrome, prediabetes, and t ype 2 diabetes.    
 
• Aim for high -quality sources that are as close to their original form as possible so 
that they include other beneficial nutrients.   
 
• Aim to boost Omega 3s and limit concentrated forms of highly processed omega -
6s like dressings and condiments made from conventional corn, soy, and safflower. You can do this by including nuts and seeds like walnuts, flax, chia seeds, pasture -
raised eggs, wild -caught fish, etc.    
 
• Remember everything you’ve learned about the quality of your culinary fats and 
oils – try to protect them from excessive exposure to heat, oxygen, and light, and do 
your best to source them from producers who also take care of  their production.  
   
• If you follow a higher -fat diet, don’t skip the fiber and phytochemicals.    
 
• Remember, overconsumption of any macronutrient can impair insulin signaling, 
so you may not need to consume fat- based snacks all day and just stick to healthy 
whole food sources during mealtimes . 
   
• Don’t mistake consuming “moderate -high carb + high fat” with “low- carb + high -
fat ketogenic diets” – energy is regulated differently in these metabolic states. 
Adding large amounts of dietary fats, especially saturated fats, without compensating by adjusti ng carbohydrate intake can lead to excess caloric intake that 
goes beyond the body’s needs and won’t be helpful for someone struggling with metabolic health issues.    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
References   
 
1. Ahmed SR, Bellamkonda S, Zilbermint M, Wang J, Kalyani RR. Effects of the low 
carbohydrate, high -fat diet on glycemic control and body weight in patients with 
type 2 diabetes: experience from a community -based cohort. BMJ Open Diabetes 
Research & Care . 2020;8(1):e000980. doi:https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjdrc -2019 -

2. Evert AB, Dennison M, Gardner CD, et al. Nutrition Therapy for Adults With 
Diabetes or Prediabetes: A Consensus Report. Diabetes Care . 2019;42(5):731- 754. 
doi:10.2337/dci19- 0014   
3. Fessler MB, Rudel LL, Brown JM. Toll- like receptor signaling links dietary fatty 
acids to the metabolic syndrome. Current Opinion in Lipidology . 2009;20(5):379 -385. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1097/mol.0b013e32832fa5c   
4. Lepretti M, Martucciello S, Burgos Aceves M, Putti R, Lionetti L. Omega -3 Fatty 
Acids and Insulin Resistance: Focus on the Regulation of Mitochondria and Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress. Nutrients . 2018;10(3):350. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/nu10030350  
5. Sears B, Perry M. The role of fatty acids in insulin resistance. Lipids in Health and 
Disease . 2015;14(1). doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/s12944 -015-0123 -1  
6. Simopoulos AP. An Increase in the Omega -6/Omega -3 Fatty Acid Ratio Increases 
the Risk for Obesity. Nutrients . 2016;8(3):128. Published 2016 Mar 2. 
doi:10.3390/nu8030128   
7. Stott NL, Marino JS. High -Fat Rodent Models of Type 2 Diabetes: From Rodent to 
Human. Nutrients . 2020;12(12):3650. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/nu12123650   
8. Yancy WS, Foy M, Chalecki AM, Vernon MC, Westman EC. A low -carbohydrate, 
ketogenic diet to treat type 2 diabetes. Nutrition & Metabolism . 2005;2(1):34. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/1743- 7075 -2-34  
9. Yuan X, Wang J, Yang S, et al. Effect of the ketogenic diet on glycemic control, 
insulin resistance, and lipid metabolism in patients with T2DM: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Nutrition & Diabetes . 2020;10(1). 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41387- 020-00142- z  
 
  
 Blood Sugar Regulation Week 4, Video 3    Title Slide 1	  Welcome back. This is part 2 of our videos on balancing macronutrients for healthy blood sugar regulation, where we are going to cover the topic of protein and fiber.    Slide 2		  Protein intake can help with blood sugar regulation in several ways. • Glycemic Control - Foods high in protein often have a lower glycemic load, so they will have a milder impact on blood sugar levels and help to reduce the spikes and crashes. Protein also takes longer to digest than carbohydrates, resulting in a slower absorption of glucose into the bloodstream. • Appetite Regulation – High-protein foods tend to be more filling, leading to increased satiety and reduced appetite. Perhaps you have heard of the importance of starting the day with protein. That is because a high-protein breakfast can lead to lower blood sugar levels and reduced appetite later in the day, compared to consuming less protein with breakfast. • Thermogenic Effects - Protein has a higher thermic effect compared to carbohydrates and fats, meaning the body expends more energy (calories) to digest, absorb, and metabolize protein. This can slightly increase metabolic rate and increase energy expenditure, which means that high-protein diets can be an effective weight loss strategy. • Muscle Synthesis – Dietary proteins provide the essential amino acids necessary for muscle maintenance, repair, and growth. Adequate protein intake is particularly important for individuals engaging in heavy physical activity, including resistance training, as it supports muscle protein synthesis. Remember, skeletal muscle is responsible for large amounts of glucose uptake and utilization, making it critical for healthy glucose regulation.    
  
Slide 3	   The ingestion of dietary protein is known to induce both insulin and glucagon secretion. This may seem counterintuitive at first, since these are counterregulatory hormones, but it makes sense when you realize that the glucagon will be needed to stimulate the conversion of some of those amino acids into glucose through gluconeogenesis, if needed. On the other hand, the anabolic properties of insulin will help put those amino acids to work by stimulating muscle growth and repair.   This insulin secretion is another way that dietary protein can improve glucose regulation. It helps clear blood glucose more quickly in the context of metabolic health. However, some researchers have noted that high levels of certain amino acids that are especially insulinogenic could contribute to insulin resistance in individuals with preexisting metabolic conditions. In particular, the branch-chain amino acid (BCAA) leucine is very effective at stimulating insulin secretion compared to other amino acids. This can be beneficial for muscle protein synthesis, especially in physically active people; however, it may raise concerns in individuals with T2DM or severe insulin resistance, and/or a sedentary lifestyle, for whom excessive consumption of leucine foods or supplements could potentially exacerbate insulin resistance.   Consider dairy for a moment. It is high in BCAAs, and the combination of these insulinogenic amino acids and lactose sugar makes it the perfect food for growing a young animal as quickly as possible. Studies looking at the relationship between dairy consumption and insulin resistance seem to find a beneficial association when dairy is consumed at low-to-moderate amounts, especially in fermented forms, whereas the higher intake groups show a significantly increased risk for the development of insulin resistance and T2DM. If you are working with a client with metabolic syndrome or T2DM, you may want to take a cautionary approach to high levels of dairy and concentrated sources of BCAAs like supplements and powders unless they are actively working on increasing lean muscle mass as part of their health program.     
  
Slide	4	 On the other hand, some amino acids appear to be especially beneficial for metabolism for all populations. L-carnitine has been found to improve markers of insulin resistance. As the name suggests, it is found in high amounts in muscle meats, and can also be found in supplemental form, which we will discuss later.  Glycine is another amino acid that appears to protect against insulin resistance. Collagen tends to be lower in BCAAs and high in glycine, making gelatinous soups and collagen powders good options for individuals with diabetes.  There is also strong evidence that in populations with metabolic disease, increasing plant-based sources of protein like nuts and legumes can be equal to or even slightly more effective at improving markers of glycemic control compared to adding animal-based proteins. However, there are a few caveats to add around plant-based protein, especially powders. First, some individuals may find that they have digestive issues or sensitivity when consuming large amounts of these powders. There is also growing evidence that consumption of plant-based protein powders can lead to higher levels of heavy metal accumulation compared to animal-based protein powders due to the fertilizers used on the crops, and unfortunately, this goes for organic crops as well. This really adds to the appeal of whole foods, where there is less risk of these pollutants becoming highly concentrated. If you opt for plant-based protein powders, be sure they are 3rd party tested for heavy metals.   Slide 5	  So, what are some takeaways from the topic of dietary protein?  • Protein has unique metabolic benefits by enhancing glycemic control, appetite regulation, boosting metabolism with its high thermic effect, and stimulating muscle synthesis.  • If your client is struggling with insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, prediabetes, and diabetes, then increasing protein intake, especially in place of carbohydrates, can be a very effective strategy.  • Foods that are rich in leucine and other BCAAs, such as dairy, are especially insulinogenic. They can support muscle growth and repair and are beneficial for healthy individuals, but if your client has a sedentary lifestyle and/or severe insulin resistance, they may find that large amounts of these insulinogenic amino acids exacerbate their existing metabolic dysfunction.  
  
• In general, it is best to aim for protein from whole food sources over powders when possible.  Slide 6	   You already know a lot about the benefits of fiber for healthy digestion. However, it also plays a critical role in improving glucose regulation as it slows down the absorption of sugar in the intestines, improves insulin response, improves serum lipid profiles, promotes a sense of fullness and reduces cravings, supports healthy gut bacteria, supports healthy blood pressure, and supports body weight regulation. What a list! And there is no shortage of strong evidence backing these claims.   Slide 7  One RCT published in the Journal of the American College of Nutrition found that glucomannan, a type of soluble fiber, was able to lower blood sugar and promote weight loss as effectively as some diabetic medications.  Research published in the New England Journal of Medicine compared a moderate fiber diet (24g of total fiber including 8g of soluble fiber) with a high fiber diet (50g of total fiber including 25g of soluble fiber) Within 6 weeks, the high-fiber diet produced a greater reduction in pre-meal blood glucose levels by 12.61 mg/dL (0.7 mmol/l) compared to the moderate fiber diet as well as reducing triglyceride levels and post-meal blood glucose levels.    A large review published in the Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine looked at numerous randomized controlled studies over 30 years and determined that dietary fiber, either from supplementation, food, or a combination of both, should be used as a primary metabolic disease management strategy, as it showed consistent reductions in HbA1c and fasting glucose.   Slide 8  As you’ll recall, there are many types of fiber, which are all classified into two main types: soluble and insoluble. Many foods contain both types.    In terms of getting the greatest benefits for blood sugar regulation, both soluble and insoluble fiber will be helpful, but soluble fiber will be the most effective. You can recognize soluble fiber in food and some powders because it forms a gel-like texture when added to water.   
  
The average American only eats about 8-15 grams of fiber a day, but recommended amounts are 28-30 grams/day for adult men and 21-25 grams per day for women, at a minimum. Many of the studies finding the most dramatic benefits use even high ranges. Of course, getting fiber from whole food sources is goal number one, but supplemental forms can make the goal much easier to achieve for some people.    I recommend getting familiar with a few low-glycemic recipes that are high in soluble fiber to have on hand for your clients to try. You can also investigate fiber supplements. If my clients are willing, I prefer powders stirred into water rather than capsules to be sure they get fully hydrated early in the digestive tract, which will help prevent any GI distress and boost satiety.   There are two main points I like to make very clear for my clients: first, start gradually and increase over the course of a week or two, and hydrate, hydrate, hydrate. As we mentioned in the digestion module, getting a diverse array of fiber types and sources is a smart approach.    References   1. Akbar A, Shreenath AP. High Fiber Diet. PubMed. Published 2021. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK559033/  2. Bandara SB, Towle KM, Monnot AD. A human health risk assessment of heavy metal ingestion among consumers of protein powder supplements. Toxicology Reports. 2020;7:1255-1262. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.toxrep.2020.08.001  3. Chandalia M, Garg A, Lutjohann D, von Bergmann K, Grundy SM, Brinkley LJ. Beneficial Effects of High Dietary Fiber Intake in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. New England Journal of Medicine. 2000;342(19):1392-1398. doi:https://doi.org/10.1056/nejm200005113421903  4. Chen HL, Sheu WH, Tai TS, Liaw YP, Chen YC. Konjac supplement alleviated hypercholesterolemia and hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetic subjects--a randomized double-blind trial. J Am Coll Nutr. 2003;22(1):36-42. doi:10.1080/07315724.2003.10719273  5. Choi M, Park S, Lee M. L-Carnitine's Effect on the Biomarkers of Metabolic Syndrome: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. Nutrients. 2020;12(9):2795. Published 2020 Sep 12. doi:10.3390/nu12092795  6. Claessens M, Saris WH, van Baak MA. Glucagon and insulin responses after ingestion of different amounts of intact and hydrolyzed proteins. Br J Nutr. 2008;100(1):61-69. doi:10.1017/S0007114507886314  7. Kung B, Anderson GH, Paré S, et al. Effect of milk protein intake and casein-to-whey ratio in breakfast meals on postprandial glucose, satiety ratings, and 
  
subsequent meal intake. J Dairy Sci. 2018;101(10):8688-8701. doi:10.3168/jds.2018-14419  8. Post RE, Mainous AG, King DE, Simpson KN. Dietary Fiber for the Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Meta-Analysis. The Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine. 2012;25(1):16-23. doi:https://doi.org/10.3122/jabfm.2012.01.110148  9. Prodhan U, Milan A, Thorstensen E, et al. Altered Dairy Protein Intake Does Not Alter Circulatory Branched Chain Amino Acids in Healthy Adults: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Nutrients. 2018;10(10):1510. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/nu10101510  10. Salehi A, Gunnerud U, Muhammed SJ, et al. The insulinogenic effect of whey protein is partially mediated by a direct effect of amino acids and GIP on β-cells. Nutr Metab (Lond). 2012;9(1):48. Published 2012 May 30. doi:10.1186/1743-7075-9-48  11. Siddik MAB, Shin AC. Recent Progress on Branched-Chain Amino Acids in Obesity, Diabetes, and Beyond. Endocrinology and Metabolism (Seoul, Korea). 2019;34(3):234-246. doi:https://doi.org/10.3803/EnM.2019.34.3.234  12. Viguiliouk E, Stewart S, Jayalath V, et al. Effect of Replacing Animal Protein with Plant Protein on Glycemic Control in Diabetes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. Nutrients. 2015;7(12):9804-9824. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/nu7125509  13. Yoon MS. The Emerging Role of Branched-Chain Amino Acids in Insulin Resistance and Metabolism. Nutrients. 2016;8(7):405. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/nu8070405   
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 4, Video 4  
 
  
Title Slide  1  
Welcome to our video on selecting therapeutic nutrients for blood sugar regulation.    
 
Slide  2  
 If you will recall from our module on digestion, we covered a lot of different categories and frameworks for thinking about therapeutic approaches. I am going to take you through a similar exercise with blood sugar regulation before looking at specific nutrients:    
  
• Insulin Sensitivity Enhancers: These supplements aim to improve the body's 
response to insulin, so we are targeting the function of insulin receptors at the 
cellular level of peripheral tissues. Examples include chromium, magnesium, vitamin 
D, alpha -lipoic acid, and cinnamon. We also mentioned omega -3 fatty acids, which 
would fall into this category as well. These substances may help cells respond to insulin more efficiently and promote glucose uptake.   
 
• Carbohydrate Absorption and Metabolism: They might help reduce or slow the 
absorption of glucose from the digestive tract, speed the excretion of glucose in the urine, or help the cells create energy from glucose by boosting glycolysis and cellular respiration in the mitochondria. Some even slow the process of gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis in the liver, which can help slow the endogenous production of glucose. Examples include magnesium, l -carnitine, gymnema, and many others. We 
already discussed dietary fiber, which would fall into this category as well.   
 
• Antioxidants: Oxidative stress can contribute to insulin resistance and impaired 
blood sugar regulation. Antioxidants like vitamin C, vitamin E, and coenzyme Q10 are thought to counteract oxidative damage and potentially support blood sugar balance.   
 
 
  
 
Slide  3  
  
• Vitamin and Mineral Cofactors: Minerals such as zinc and magnesium act as 
enzymatic cofactors for many of the enzymes involved in insulin action and glucose 
metabolism. You will also find many B  vitamins functioning as critical cofactors in 
metabolism. In some cases, boosting levels of these vitamins and minerals through supplements can positively affect blood sugar regulation.   
 
• Adaptogens: Some adaptogens may help normalize the stress response. As we 
learned, adrenal stress hormones are involved in preventing glucose from falling too 
low. However, if they are chronically elevated, they can contribute to insulin 
resistance and ele vated blood glucose. Adaptogens can help normalize the levels of 
stress hormones, thereby supporting healthy blood sugar regulation.   
  
• Glandulars: You may see glandular tissues in some formulas designed to support 
blood sugar. This glandular approach aims to nourish the corresponding gland in the body, so if you think back to what we learned about the PAALS, you might not be surprised to see the pancreas, liver, and adrenal glands used for blood sugar 
regulation.    
 
• Therapeutics for Gut Health: Remember, the intestinal microbiome can make an 
enormous impact on blood sugar regulation. Any approach that contributes to improved digestion and a healthier, more balanced microbiome will be supportive of blood sugar regulation.   
  
Of course, many of these categories will overlap and certain nutrients will fall into several categories, like magnesium which has multiple mechanisms of action by which it can assist with blood glucose management. As with the categories we covered in dige stion, these are not 
written in stone – so I don’t want you to get too caught up trying to memorize them - they are 
just frameworks to help us think about what we are trying to achieve – what function do we 
want to support. You may come up with some other ideas for drafting your approach as you think about each of the PAALS and where the signs and symptoms might be pointing toward a pattern of dysfunction.    
  
Slide  4  
  
There are many effective, evidence -based therapeutic nutrients available, so how do you 
choose? In addition to thinking about the functional categories above and where dysfunction may be occurring, you can also ask yourself additional questions. For example:  
  
 
• What stage of dysglycemia do you feel your client may be experiencing? If 
someone has low to normal fasting blood glucose but is feeling a lot of ups and 
downs and having symptoms like feeling “hangry,” unsteady, or anxious throughout the day, or is having difficulty with sleep, then they may be having reactive hypoglycemia. For these individuals, nutrients that target lowering glucose levels may not be helpful. Their pancreas is still able to produce sufficient insulin and that insulin is working –  which is why they are so susceptible to the rapid onset of a 
hypoglycemia spell! So this individual may benefit more from nutrients to help 
nourish and calm their nervous system and adrenal glands, while also reducing 
stimulants like caffeine and focusing on getting in more proteins, fats, and fiber and 
avoiding foods that will cause those spikes. On the other hand, if someone’s fasting 
glucose levels are starting to creep upward and they are having more signs of insulin resistance and are concerned about advancing into more progressed st ages of 
dysglycemia like prediabetes, then looking for nutrients that help to lower glucose and increase insulin sensitivity makes more sense.   
 
Slide  5  
  
• What is happening in the other foundations? Is there something major 
happening in the digestive system that could be related to the blood sugar issues? If so, what recommendation might help both foundations? For example, berberine is a powerful dysbiotic a gent and can help with lowering levels of candida and SIBO in 
the intestines which can cause inflammation, and it is also excellent at helping lower glucose levels. Or if someone has a lot of sleep issues that seem related, magnesium 
can be a great help fo r someone struggling with sleep, and it also boosts blood sugar 
regulation. You are looking for maximal benefit for minimal intervention.   
  
• Out of all the therapeutic nutrients I’ve identified, which ones would be easiest 
to get from the diet, and which ones would not? For example, cinnamon is a 
beneficial nutrient for blood sugar regulation and a lot of clients would be happy to add it to their diet. On the other hand, berberine is a bitter pungent herbal extract that most people are not going to be getting from the diet.     
 
• What stands out as missing in the diet already?   
 
• What have they tried before and what was their experience?    
 
• Of course, there are also questions of affordability and access, which are also 
important considerations for your client.    
  
 
You will have more time to discuss some of these considerations for selecting therapeutic 
nutrients and supplements later in the program. In our next video, we will take a deep dive into some of the top evidence -based nutrients that support blood sugar reg ulation.   
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 4, Video 5  
 
  
Title Slide  1  
 Welcome back. Now that we have spent a little time thinking about how we can approach therapeutic nutrients through a functional lens, let’s look at some of the top evidence -based 
nutrients for supporting blood sugar regulation.    
  
Slide  2  
 Magnesium is well known for its role in hundreds of reactions throughout the body. One of those is its role in converting carbohydrates into energy and improving blood glucose tolerance. Magnesium also helps the pancreas to create insulin and cells to reco gnize and respond to it. 
Magnesium can be found in foods such as dark leafy greens, legumes, nuts, seeds, and whole grains,  however, there has been a documented decrease in magnesium content in fresh 
produce over the past several decades, and it is estimated that 80% of the magnesium content of whole foods is lost when it undergoes processing. This has resulted in widespread s ubclinical 
magnesium deficiency throughout the world and bolsters the argument for supplementation in many cases.    
  
Numerous studies have shown how oral magnesium supplementation can improve HbA1c levels, insulin resistance, and other markers of blood sugar regulation in those with type 2 diabetes.   
  
Slide  3  
  
Vitamin D can indirectly support glucose management through many different pathways, such as improving immune balance and reducing inflammation, but it has some roles that are even 
more specific to glucose metabolism. Most notably, vitamin D receptors are found in the 
pancreatic beta cells, and activation of these receptors by vitamin D helps to stimulate insulin 
production within the cells that can then be released in response to glucose.    
 While the most abundant source of natural vitamin D is exposure to sunlight, foods with vitamin D include fish (especially wild -caught salmon), fish roe, cod liver oil, pork fat from 
 
animals raised with adequate sun exposure, pasture -raised chicken eggs, and some 
mushrooms.   
  
Low vitamin D status has been associated with impaired metabolism and glucose intolerance. A 
recent and large meta- analysis of randomized controlled trials found that vitamin D 
supplementation at an average dose of 4000 IU per day significantly reduces fas ting glucose 
and fasting insulin levels.    
 
Slide  4  
  
Chromium is a mineral that has been identified as having a beneficial role in supporting blood sugar regulation.  It is primarily known for its ability to increase the effects of insulin activity. 
Chromium can be found in foods like meats, whole grains, most vegetables, and nuts.    
  
A recent systematic review and meta -analysis of randomized clinical trials found that chromium 
supplementation may support the reduction of fasting glucose levels, insulin levels, and insulin resistance.    
 
Slide  5  
 B vitamins play various roles in the body, and many of them can support healthy blood sugar regulation through their involvement in metabolism. You will often see these in the form of a “b 
complex” which will include multiple types of B vitamins since they have co -dependent and 
synergistic relationships. Not only do they support metabolism and the conversion of macronutrients into energy, but B vitamins are also essential to the body’s st ress response.  
 
They play central roles in the production of neurotransmitters and adrenal hormones. When 
someone has been chronically stressed or has been taxing their adrenal glands with regular 
blood sugar spikes and crashes, then B vitamins can become depleted. Stress and blood sugar dysregulation can contribute  to B vitamin depletion through increased metabolism and use, 
impaired absorption, and increased urinary excretion. For this reason, B vitamins can be especially helpful for someone who has been experiencing reactive hypoglycemia on a regular basis and/or has a taxed HPA axis.    
  
• B1 (Thiamine)   
• B3 (Niacin)   
• B5 (Pantothenic Acid)   
• B6 (Pyridoxine)    
• B7 (Biotin)   
• B9 (Folate)   
• B12 (Cobalamin)    
 
  
Slide  6  
 
Myo -inositol is a naturally occurring compound that belongs to the vitamin B complex group, 
although it's not officially recognized as a vitamin. There are several forms of inositol, but myoinositol makes up the vast majority of inositol in the human body.  Myo -inositol has been 
found to enhance insulin signaling and facilitate the uptake and utilization of glucose by cells.    
  
We can synthesize myoinositol, and we can also get it from foods like fruits, vegetables, legumes, grains, and nuts, although dietary levels decrease with increased processing. Myo -
inositol supplementation has been extensively studied in the context of pol ycystic ovarian 
syndrome (PCOS). Myo -inositol supplementation has been shown to improve insulin sensitivity 
in women with PCOS, which may help regulate menstrual cycles and improve fertility. It is also well- studied for the prevention of gestational diabetes in pregnant people, especially pregnant 
people with higher body weights or metabolic conditions.    
  
Myo -inositol also plays a complex role in thyroid physiology. Supplementation with myoinositol 
in conjunction with selenium can improve thyroid hormone levels in both autoimmune and non-autoimmune hypothyroidism. Of course, improving thyroid levels is directly  related to 
metabolism. As we discussed earlier, there is a strong link between hypothyroidism and weight gain, fatigue, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia.    
  
Slide  7  
 L-carnitine is an impressive nutrient when it comes to glucose metabolism, as well as fatty acid 
metabolism. It is a naturally occurring compound that your body can synthesize from the amino acids lysine and methionine. We can also consume it from various foods, particularly animal products. Foods rich in L -carnitine include red meat (especially beef and lamb), poultry, fish, 
dairy products, and eggs. Plant -based sources like avocados and certain nuts (like almonds), but 
they contain much smaller amounts.    
  
L-carnitine plays a key role in transporting long -chain fatty acids from the cytoplasm to the 
mitochondria and indirectly contributes to the beta -oxidation of fatty acids, thereby supporting 
fat metabolism. It also helps maintain insulin sensitivity and me tabolic flexibility. A deficiency in 
L-carnitine can disrupt fat and glucose metabolism. L -carnitine's potential mechanisms for 
reducing insulin resistance include removing harmful lipids from cells, repairing cell membranes, and clearing or preventing the  excess accumulation of certain metabolic 
byproducts that result from energy production in the cell.    
 
 
  
 
Slide  8  
   
Alpha -lipoic acid is one of the most impressive compounds we know of when it comes to 
supporting blood sugar regulation. It is known to:   
  
• Improves the insulin cell receptor function in membranes . 
  
• Promotes the translocation of glucose transporters (GLUT4) to the cell surface, 
allowing more glucose to enter cells and be used for energy . 
  
• Acts as a powerful antioxidant that helps protect cells from oxidative stress and 
damage caused by free radicals. It also can help recycle (or reduce) other 
antioxidants such as vitamins C and E, as well as glutathione.   
 
• Exhibits anti -inflammatory properties that may help reduce inflammation in cells 
and tissues, thereby promoting better insulin signaling and blood sugar regulation.  
  
• Serves as an essential cofactor for several mitochondrial enzymes involved in the 
breakdown of amino acids  and the production of energy.    
  
Humans synthesize some amount of alpha -lipoic acid endogenously, and it is also found in 
foods such as red meat, carrots, beets, spinach, broccoli, and potatoes. Interestingly, consumption of alpha lipoic acid in foods has not been found to raise plasma le vels in humans. 
The studies finding positive outcomes in individuals with more advanced diabetic health issues 
are using therapeutic supplemental doses upwards of 600 –1800 milligrams, and some even use 
IV delivery due to limited intestinal absorption.    
 
Slide  9  
  
We discussed the many therapeutic benefits of vinegar and acetic acid for digestion, and here 
again, we find it has several therapeutic benefits for blood sugar regulation:   
  
• Acetic acid in vinegar has been shown to improve insulin sensitivity and help 
regulate post -prandial glucose levels.    
 
• Some studies suggest that acetic acid may help with weight management by 
increasing satiety, feelings of fullness, and reducing appetite.  
  
• Vinegar has been shown to lower total cholesterol and triglyceride levels and 
increase HDL (good) cholesterol.    
 
 
• It has antimicrobial properties that may help inhibit the growth of dysbiotic  
microbes in the stomach and intestines. This property is one reason why vinegar has 
been used as a natural food preservative for so many years.   
  
 Slide  10  
  
Berberine is a chemical compound from several different species from the Berberis plant group. Over the past several decades it has received attention for its therapeutic use for supporting blood sugar regulation.    
  
One research study found that when berberine was taken at a dose of 0.5 grams 3 times a day 
it helped to reduce blood glucose levels similar to metformin.   
  
Several studies that used berberine in the treatment of t ype 2 d iabetes produced positive 
results such as a decrease in HbA1c, fasting blood glucose,  postprandial blood glucose (glucose 
after a meal), insulin, triglycerides, and an increase in total antioxidant capacity.   
  
One mechanism of action that may explain the potent effects of berberine is its stimulating 
effect on GLUT4. Several studies have demonstrated its potential to allow for a dosage 
reduction of other diabetic drugs which could lead to less toxicity and fewer  side effects for 
patients with type 2 d iabetes.   
 
Berberine has also been shown to be highly effective in the treatment of non -alcoholic fatty 
liver disease which is highly associated with metabolic conditions. This is partly attributed to its 
beneficial effects on the intestinal microbiome in individuals  with dysbiosis and high levels of 
LPS.  
 
Slide  11  
 
Gymnema is a plant with bioactive compounds, primarily gymnemic  acids, that block the 
sensation of sweetness by inhibiting sugar receptors on the taste buds. If you were to experiment with Gymnema  by placing it on your tongue, letting it sit a moment, and then 
following it with honey, table sugar, or even stevia –  you wouldn’t be able to taste any 
sweetness. People who consume supplemental gymnema report that they find sweet foods less appealing, which could help reduce sugar intake. In addition to lowering sugar consumption, it can also block receptors in your intestines, lowering sugar absorption and your post -meal blood 
sugar levels.   
 Some studies also suggest that Gymnema  can improve insulin sensitivity and stimulate insulin 
secretion from the pancreas. Gymnemic acids have also been shown to inhibit the process of gluconeogenesis in the liver, helping to lower endogenous glucose production.    
 
  
Slide  12  
  
Many herbs and spices are rich in phytochemicals with antioxidant and anti -inflammatory 
properties that can support glucose regulation, but three , in particular, stand out in the 
research: curcumin from turmeric, cinnamon, and fenugreek.   
  
Curcumin    
Curcumin is one of the most well -studied herb constituents in medical databases. Of its many 
beneficial uses, numerous studies have found that it can improve glucose regulation by 
increasing insulin production and secretion, increasing the uptake of glucos e into cells, and 
suppressing hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. The dosage of curcumin varies by 
study, but a common dose is thought to be around 500 - 1500 mg per day in divided doses.    
  
Cinnamon   
Cinnamon has also been found to reduce insulin resistance and support blood sugar regulation. One study gave individuals with type 2 diabetes either 1, 3, or 6 grams/day of cinnamon. After 40 days, all three levels of cinnamon intake resulted in reduced fasting serum glucose by 18 -
29%, triglyceride by 23 -30%, LDL cholesterol by 7 -27%, and total cholesterol by 12- 26%, while 
no significant changes were noted in the placebo groups. This is a pretty remarkable effect size with very moderate and manageable dose sizes.    
  
Fenugreek   
Fenugreek seeds have also been shown to increase insulin synthesis and release from 
pancreatic beta cells. The seeds are also high in soluble fiber which helps to slow down the 
absorption of sugar from the digestive tract.    
 
Slide  3  
 As we mentioned in our Digestion module, adaptogens are plants that are known to normalize stress response. We know that elevated stress hormones can drive elevations in blood glucose. We also know that large swings in blood glucose and reactive hyperglyce mia can contribute to 
the dysregulation of our stress response. This bi -directional connection is one reason that 
adaptogens may be beneficial in managing blood glucose levels.   
  
Many adaptogens also contain powerful antioxidant and anti -inflammatory compounds that 
can support metabolic health. Ginseng, for example, has been shown to improve insulin secretion and signaling, glucose uptake, and reduce oxidative stress and meta- infla mmation in 
individuals with T2D.    
  
 
While they can help lower glucose levels in the case of insulin resistance and hyperglycemia, it 
is also possible for adaptogens as well as glandulars to be useful for individuals experiencing hypoglycemia. The same goes for any nutrient that helps normalize the stress response. If someone has been stressed for a long time and is beginning to have low or dysregulated adrenal output, they may have difficulty releasing the appropriate amounts of cortisol and adrenaline between meals to help prevent their gluc ose from dropping too low. If adaptogens 
or glandulars can support the function of the adrenal glands, then they may be able to help someone stabilize those lower ranges and reduce the symptoms of hypoglycemia.    
 
Slide  14  
  
As mentioned earlier, you may also find glandular extract from endocrine glands from bovine or porcine sources in many formulas designed to support healthy blood sugar regulation. In general, you will find the organs of the PAALS, except adipose tissue. So  that is the pancreas, 
adrenals, and liver. You might also see hypothalamus and pituitary tissue, as well as thyroid tissue, as these glands are central to endocrine balance and metabolism. The idea is that by consuming endocrine tissues from healthy anima ls, one can attain nutrients that support the 
function of that corresponding gland within the human. In some cases, the glandulars also contain bioactive peptides that can be absorbed through the digestive tract and may support the body when the function o f that corresponding gland is low.   
   
Slide  15  
  
As a reminder, these supplemental approaches have the potential to dramatically lower blood sugar and could lead to hypoglycemia, especially in individuals who are also changing their diet 
and lifestyle. This is extremely important to be aware of for indiv iduals taking blood sugar -
lowering medications, as they can reach dangerous levels of hypoglycemia in some cases. 
Imagine someone who was just recently diagnosed with T2DM and begins taking a blood sugar -
lowering medication.  
 They were really shaken and motivated by the diagnosis, so they also started working out, eating low carb, and consuming gymnema, cinnamon, and berberine all at once. You can imagine how this could lead to major hypoglycemia spells which can be dangerous, especially if 
it causes someone to pass out, fall, or have difficulty operating a motor vehicle, etc. This is why we want to research contraindications between medication and supplements and educate clients on the importance of monitoring their blood gluco se levels while making diet and 
lifestyle changes.   
  
 
  
 
Slide  16  
 
When it comes to probiotics, determining  which strains are most effective for improving 
glycemic control can be challenging due to the heterogeneity of the research. Many of the controlled trials tend to compare against different controls –  placebo, no treatment, or against 
a different species/s train. Many studies use multi -strain formulas, making it difficult to pinpoint 
the effects of one individual strain. The duration of the study and dosages used also vary widely. The individuals included in the studies also vary greatly; prediabetes (obese or non -
obese), diabetes (insulin- dependent or independent), etc. The outcomes measured also vary 
widely, from specific markers of glycemic control, and lipid metabolism, to inflammation.    
  
The good news is that even though the studies are highly heterogeneous , there are a lot of 
studies that show positive results on many different markers of metabolic health. The number of studies and strains being evaluated is growing all the time. Let’s look at a few of the positive 
findings from high -quality RCTs over the past decade or so.    
 
Slide  17  
  
Lactobacillus acidophilus La5, Bifidobacterium lactis Bb12    
 
• These two st rains are often studied together. They are found in a few types of 
yogurts in numerous probiotic and synbiotic blends.   
 
• In studies, probiotic yogurts prepared with these strains:   
  
• Decreased serum uric acid in patients with metabolic syndrome. Uric acid 
tends to be elevated in metabolic syndrome and is thought to promote visceral fat storage and insulin resistance . 
  
• Increased total antioxidant capacity  compared to baseline and improved 
markers of oxidative stress.  
  
• Decreased HbA1c when compared with placebo . 
  
• Improved LDL -HDL ratios (lowering LDL cholesterol and increasing HDL) .  
 
Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM    
 
• This strain can be found in numerous food- based products like yogurt and 
toddler formulas, as well as a wide variety of supplement formulas.    
 
 
• In a 4 -week RCT with individuals with T2DM, participants consumed capsules 
with freeze -dried Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM or placebo. Participants were then 
subjected to a dose of E.coli -based lipopolysaccharide to see what would happen to 
their markers of glycemic control and inflammation. Researchers found that insulin 
sensitivity was preserved among volunteers in the L. acidophilus NCFM group, 
whereas it decreased in the placebo group, although they did not observe differences in the systemic inflammat ory response.   
  
Slide  18  
 
Bifidobacterium lactis HN019   
  
This strain can be found in numerous multi -strain formulas in the market both in the United 
States and internationally.    
  
• In adult subjects with metabolic syndrome, daily ingestion of a probiotic milk 
containing this strain resulted in a reduction in BMI, total cholesterol, LDL 
cholesterol, and pro -inflammatory cytokines TNF -a and IL -6 when compared to the 
control group.   
  
• In another study looking at adults with metabolic syndrome, 90 -day ingestion of 
probiotic milk also had a beneficial effect on inflammatory and oxidative biomarkers, especially those related to cardiovascular health and serum lipids.   
  
Lactobacillus casei Shirota   
 
• This strain is primarily found as a fermented milk product . 
  
• Although it was a small study, one 4 -week RCT found that consumption of a 
probiotic drink containing Shirota helped prevent diet- induced insulin resistance and 
weight gain in healthy subjects who were fed a high- fat (65% energy) high -energy 
(+50% kcal) die t. Individuals who consumed the same diet without the probiotic 
intervention had increased markers of insulin resistance and increased body weight.   
  
  
Slide  19  
  
There have also been several studies from various multi- strain blends that showed similarly 
positive results –  improved glucose, lipid, and inflammatory markers. These blends contain a 
variety of species, including specific strains of Bifidobacterium bifidum, lactis, and longum, as well as Lactobacillus acidoph ilus, casei, brevis, delbrueckii, bulgaricus, and rhamnosus.    
 
  
Keep in mind, that this is not a comprehensive review of probiotics and synbiotics that have 
been shown to improve markers of metabolic health. The research is growing every day. We’ll be sure to provide you with some helpful systematic reviews and metanal ysis in your reference 
materials and encourage you to look for peer -reviewed primary research on any strains you are 
interested in using. Simply searching “strain name + health condition” is a good place to start.   
   
 
 
  
 
References   
 
1. Andreasen AS, Larsen N, Pedersen -Skovsgaard T, et al. Effects of Lactobacillus 
acidophilus NCFM on insulin sensitivity and the systemic inflammatory response in human subjects. British Journal of Nutrition. 2010;104(12):1831- 1838. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1017/s0007114510002874  
2. Asbaghi O, Fatemeh N, Mahnaz RK, et al. Effects of chromium supplementation 
on glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta -
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Pharmacol Res . 2020;161:105098. 
doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2020.105098  
3. Bernini LJ, Simão ANC, Alfieri DF, et al. Beneficial effects of Bifidobacterium lactis 
on lipid profile and cytokines in patients with metabolic syndrome: A randomized 
trial. Effects of probiotics on metabolic syndrome. Nutrition. 2016;32(6):716- 719. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nut.2015.11.001  
4. Capece U, Moffa S, Improta I, et al. Alpha- Lipoic Acid and Glucose Metabolism: A 
Comprehensive Update on Biochemical and Therapeutic Features. Nutrients . 
2022;15(1):18. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15010018  
5. Cazzola R, Della Porta M, Manoni M, Iotti S, Pinotti L, Maier JA. Going to the 
roots of reduced magnesium dietary intake: A tradeoff between climate changes and 
sources. Heliyon . 2020;6(11):e05390. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e05390  
6. Chen W, Balan P, Popovich DG. Review of Ginseng Anti -Diabetic Studies. 
Molecules. 2019;24(24). doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules24244501   
7. Chuengsamarn S, Rattanamongkolgul S, Luechapudiporn R, Phisalaphong C, 
Jirawatnotai S. Curcumin Extract for Prevention of Type 2 Diabetes. Diabetes Care . 
2012;35(11):2121- 2127. doi:https://doi.org/10.2337/dc12- 0116  
8. Di Pierro F, Putignano P, Villanova N, Montesi L, Moscatiello S, Marchesini G. 
Preliminary study about the possible glycemic clinical advantage in using a fixed 
 
combination of Berberis aristata and Silybum marianum standardized extracts versus 
only Berberis aristata in patients with type 2 diabetes. Clin Pharmacol . 2013;5:167 -
174. Published 2013 Nov 19. doi:10.2147/CPAA.S54308  
9. ELDerawi WA, Naser IA, Taleb MH, Abutair AS. The Effects of Oral Magnesium 
Supplementation on Glycemic Response among Type 2 Diabetes Patients. Nutrients . 
2018;11(1):44. Published 2018 Dec 26. doi:10.3390/nu11010044  
10. Eslamparast T, Zamani F, Hekmatdoost A, et al. Effects of synbiotic  
supplementation on insulin resistance in subjects with the metabolic syndrome: a randomised, double -blind, placebo -controlled pilot study. British Journal of 
Nutrition. 2014;112(3):438- 445. doi:https ://doi.org/10.1017/s0007114514000919   
11. Gaddam A, Galla C, Thummisetti S, Marikanty RK, Palanisamy UD, Rao PV. Role of 
Fenugreek in the prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus in prediabetes. Journal of 
Diabetes & Metabolic Disorders . 2015;14(1). doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/s40200-
015- 0208- 4  
12. Hodaei H, Adibian M, Nikpayam O, Hedayati M, Sohrab G. The effect of curcumin 
supplementation on anthropometric indices, insulin resistance and oxidative stress in patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized, double -blind clinical trial. 
Diabetology & Metabolic Syndrome . 2019;11(1). 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/s13098- 019-0437- 7  
13. Hulston CJ, Churnside AA, Venables MC. Probiotic supplementation prevents 
high -fat, overfeeding -induced insulin resistance in human subjects. British Journal of 
Nutrition. 2015;113(4):596- 602. doi:https://doi.org/10.1017/s0007114514004097   
14. Johnston CS, Gaas CA. Vinegar: medicinal uses and antiglycemic effect. 
MedGenMed . 2006;8(2):61. Published 2006 May 30.   
15. Kalra B, Kalra S, Sharma JB. The inositols and polycystic ovary syndrome. Indian 
Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism . 2016;20(5):720 -724. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.4103/2230- 8210.189231  
16. Kanetkar P, Singhal R, Kamat M. Recent Advances in Indian Herbal Drug 
ResearchGuest Editor: Thomas Paul Asir DevasagayamGymnema sylvestre : A 
Memoir. Journal of Clinical Biochemistry and Nutrition. 2007;41(2):77- 81. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3164/jcbn.2007010  
17. Khan A, Safdar M, Ali Khan MM, Khattak KN, Anderson RA. Cinnamon Improves 
Glucose and Lipids of People With Type 2 Diabetes. Diabetes Care . 
2003;26(12):3215- 3218. doi:https://doi.org/10.2337/diacare.26.12.3215  
18. Kizilaslan N, Erdem NZ. The Effect of Different Amounts of Cinnamon 
Consumption on Blood Glucose in Healthy Adult Individuals. International Journal of Food Science . 2019;2019:1- 9. doi:https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/4138534  
19. Li J, Yu H, Wang S, et al. Natural products, an important resource for discovery of 
multitarget drugs and functional food for regulation of hepatic glucose metabolism. Drug Design, Development and Therapy . 2018;Volume 12:121- 135. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.2147/dddt.s151860  
 
20. Lipoic Acid. Linus Pauling Institute. Published April 28, 2014. 
https://lpi.oregonstate.edu/mic/dietary -factors/lipoic -acid  
21. Miller O. Glandular Therapy . Accessed November 21, 2023. 
https://theholistichealthclinic.com/wp -
content/uploads/2017/10/GlandularTherapy.pdf  
22. Moazezi Z, Qujeq D. Berberis Fruit Extract and Biochemical Parameters in 
Patients With Type II Diabetes. Jundishapur J Nat Pharm Prod. 2014;9(2):e13490. 
Published 2014 Apr 7. doi:10.17795/jjnpp -13490  
23. Mi J, He W, Lv J, Zhuang K, Huang H, Quan S. Effect of berberine on the HPA -axis 
pathway and skeletal muscle GLUT4 in type 2 diabetes mellitus rats. Diabetes Metab 
Syndr Obes . 2019;12:1717- 1725. Published 2019 Sep 3. doi:10.2147/DMSO.S211188  
24. Mitri J, Pittas AG. Vitamin D and Diabetes. Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics 
of North America . 2014;43(1):205 -232. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecl.2013.09.01  
25. Mohamadshahi M, Veissi  M, Haidari F, Javid AZ, Mohammadi F, Shirbeigi E. 
Effects of probiotic yogurt consumption on lipid profile in type 2 diabetic patients: A randomized controlled clinical trial. J Res Med Sci . 2014;19(6):531 -536.   
26. National Institutes of Health. Office of dietary supplements -  dietary supplement 
fact sheet: Chromium. Nih.gov. Published 2017. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Chromium -HealthProfessional/   
27. National Institutes of Health. Office of Dietary Supplements -  Magnesium. 
National Institutes of Health. Published 2016. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Magnesium -HealthProfessional/   
28. National Institutes of Health. Office of Dietary Supplements -  Vitamin D. 
ods.od.nih.gov. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminD -
Consumer/#:~:text=Fatty%20fish%20(like%20trout%2C%20salmon   
29. Payer J, Jackuliak P, Kužma M, Džupon M, Vaňuga P. Supplementation with myo -
inositol and Selenium improves the clinical conditions and biochemical features of women with or at risk for subclinical hypothyroidism. Frontiers in Endocrinology . 
2022;13. doi:https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2022.1067029  
30. Prabhakar PK, Doble M. Effect of Natural Products on Commercial Oral 
Antidiabetic Drugs in Enhancing 2 -Deoxyglucose Uptake by 3T3 -L1 Adipocytes. Ther 
Adv Endocrinol Metab. 2011;2(3):103 -114. doi:10.1177/2042018811411356  
31. Probiotic Lactobacillus gasseri SBT2055 improves insulin secretion in a diabetic 
rat model. Journal of Dairy Science . 2019;102(2):997- 1006. 
doi:https ://doi.org/10.3168/jds.2018- 15203   
32. Rezazadeh L, Alipour B, Jafarabadi MA, Behrooz M, Gargari BP. Daily 
consumption effects of probiotic yogurt containing Lactobacillus acidophilus La5 and 
Bifidobacterium lactis Bb12 on oxidative stress in metabolic syndrome patients. 
Clinical Nutrition ESPEN . 2021;41:136 -142. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnesp.2020.12.003  
 
33. Sabico S, Al- Mashharawi A, Al- Daghri NM, et al. Effects of a multi -strain probiotic 
supplement for 12 weeks in circulating endotoxin levels and cardiometabolic profiles 
of medication naïve T2DM patients: a randomized clinical trial. Journal of Translational Medicine . 2017;15:249. doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967- 017-1354 -
x  
34. Sabico S, Al- Mashharawi A, Al- Daghri NM, et al. Effects of a 6 -month multi -strain 
probiotics supplementation in endotoxemic, inflammatory and cardiometabolic status of T2DM patients: A randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled trial. Clin 
Nutr . 2019;38(4):1561- 1569. doi:10.1016/j.clnu.2018.08.009  
35. Sayem ASM, Arya A, Karimian H, Krishnasamy N, Ashok Hasamnis A, Hossain CF. 
Action of Phytochemicals on Insulin Signaling Pathways Accelerating Glucose Transporter (GLUT4) Protein Translocation. Molecules. 2018;23(2):258. Published 
2018 Jan 28. doi:10.3390/molecules23020258  
36. Sharma RD, Raghuram TC, Rao NS. Effect of fenugreek seeds on blood glucose 
and serum lipids in type I diabetes. Eur J Clin Nutr . 1990;44(4):301 -306.   
37. Shidfar F, Ebrahimi SS, Hosseini S, Heydari I, Shidfar S, Hajhassani G. The Effects 
of Berberis vulgaris Fruit Extract on Serum Lipoproteins, apoB, apoA- I, 
Homocysteine, Glycemic Control and Total Antioxidant Capacity in Type 2 Diabetic Patients. Iran J Pharm Res . 2012;11(2):643 -652.   
38. Silva ML, Bernardo MA, Singh J, de Mesquita MF. Cinnamon as a Complementary 
Therapeutic Approach for Dysglycemia and Dyslipidemia Control in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Its Molecular Mechanism of Action: A Review. Nutrients . 
2022;14(13):2773. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/nu1413277  
39. Solati M, Ouspid E, Hosseini S, Soltani N, Keshavarz M, Dehghani M. Oral 
magnesium supplementation in type II diabetic patients. Med J Islam Repub Iran. 2014;28:67. Published 2014 Jul 15.   
40. Tang H, Li D, Li Y, Zhang X, Song Y, Li X. Effects of Vitamin D Supplementation on 
Glucose and Insulin Homeostasis and Incident Diabetes among Nondiabetic Adults: A Meta -Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. Int J Endocrinol . 2018;2018:7908764. 
Published 2018 Dec 3. doi:10.1155/2018/7908764  
41. Tiwari P, Mishra BN, Sangwan NS. Phytochemical and Pharmacological Properties 
ofGymnema sylvestre: An Important Medicinal Plant. BioMed Research International . 2014;2014:1- 18. doi:https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/830285  
42. Tonucci LB, Olbrich dos Santos KM, Licursi de Oliveira L, Rocha Ribeiro SM, 
Duarte Martino HS. Clinical application of probiotics in type 2 diabetes mellitus: A randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled study. Clinical Nutrition . 
2017;36(1):85- 92. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2015.11.011  
43. Virmani MA, Cirulli M. The Role of l -Carnitine in Mitochondria, Prevention of 
Metabolic Inflexibility and Disease Initiation. International Journal of Molecular Sciences . 2022;23(5):2717. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23052717   
 
44. Whole Glandular Concentrates Provide Multiple Factors . 
https://cdn2.hubspot.net/hubfs/4004166/Articles%20and%20Abstracts/A%20Ration
ale%20for%20the%20Use%20of%20Glandular%20Products.pdf   
45. Yin J, Xing H, Ye J. Efficacy of berberine in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Metabolism . 2008;57(5):712- 717. doi:10.1016/j.metabol.2008.01.013  
46. Zamani M, Naseh Pahlavani, Mahlagha Nikbaf -Shandiz, et al. The effects of L -
carnitine supplementation on glycemic markers in adults: A systematic review and dose -response meta -analysis. Frontiers in Nutrition . 2023;9. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2022.1082097   
 
 
 
Blood Sugar Regulation  
Week 4, Video 6  
 
  
Title Slide  1  
 Welcome back. In this final week of our blood sugar regulation module, we’ve covered some of the core principles for reducing glycemic load, increasing helpful foods like omega- 3 fatty acids, 
proteins, and fiber, as well as some of the top therapeutic nutrients and supplements for blood sugar regulation. Before we close this module, let’s review a few of the most important lifestyle factors.    
 
Slide  2  
  
As we have previously explored, when a person eats is arguably just as important as what they 
eat to prevent blood sugar dysregulation.   
  
Everyday habits in the United States include skipping breakfast, consuming the largest meal of 
the day in the evening, snacking close to bedtime, and getting inadequate or poor -quality 
sleep.    
  
A recent cohort study that included 156 non- shift workers, found that approximately 75% of 
their daily calories were consumed in the afternoon and evening. Irregular meal timing and the consumption of the bulk of daily calories in the late afternoon and ev ening have been shown to 
disrupt several normal physiological processes, including sleep and blood sugar regulation.    
  
As a quick review, studies have shown that when identical meals were given in the evening and morning, the evening meal resulted in a significantly higher glycemic response in blood sugar. Other studies have shown that making breakfast the largest meal of the day and dinner the 
smallest meal of the day is linked to improved glucose tolerance, insulin function, and a lower BMI. Not only are decreased glucose tolerance and insulin resistance a result of late -night 
eating, but it can also cause an increase in inflammatory markers which we know is detrimental to metabolic health. This is not to mention the negative impacts regular late -night eating can 
have  on digestion.  
   
   
 
Slide  3  
  
One of the most effective meal -timing strategies for supporting healthy blood sugar regulation 
is time -restricted eating , or TRE . It is not a specific diet and does not necessarily restrict caloric 
intake. Rather, it is a manner of eating that supports the body’s natural physiological processes. 
The effectiveness of time -restricted eating is greatly dependent on how it is conducted. Studies 
have shown that the time of day in which the eating window falls impacts the effects of TRE , 
especially in diabetes.  Let’s compare late TRE, which places the fasting window in the morning 
and feeding window later in the day, to early TRE, which places the feeding window in the 
earlier part of the day.  
   
Human studies have shown that restricting eating time to the late afternoon or evening does 
not reliably produce improvements in glucose regulation and  may even produce adverse 
results. Two  crossover studies compared the effects of eating three standard meals spread 
throughout the day vs. one meal in the late afternoon or evening. Both studies kept the total 
amount of calories consumed at a level calculated to maintain a steady weight for each participant across study arms. One study showed morning glucose levels were significantly higher when subjects consumed only one meal per day in the evenings, while the other study 
produced no significant improvements. R esearchers noted a trend of delay ed insulin response 
in subjects who consumed only one meal per day in the later part of the day, suggesting that late time -restricted eating may impair pancreatic beta -cell function, which aligns with what we 
know about melatonin suppressing pancreatic function in the evenings.    
  
Early time -restricted eating, on the other hand, has shown promising results as a potential 
treatment for diabetes. Early time -restricted eating is a type of intermittent fasting that aligns 
eating patterns with the body’s natural circadian rhythms. It limits the daily eating window to the earlier part of the day and extends the  evening and overnight fasting window.   Remember, 
glucose metabolism, insulin regulation, and energy metabolism are all governed by circadian rhythms  and research  has shown that during the earlier part of the day, not only are the 
pancreatic beta -cells are more responsive, and the peripheral cells are better able to utilize f uel 
for energy.    
 We can see this play out in large population studie s. The country of Norway, which has one of 
the lowest rates of diabetes in the world, utilizes some of the early time -restricted eating 
principles as they typically consume dinner at a much earlier time around 4:30 p.m.   
Numerous animal studies have also shown that if food is limited to the natural active period of 
the day for a specific species, the result is not only improved metabolic health but also improvements in the gut microbiome. These benefits on the microbiome likely represent an 
important pathw ay by which these eating patterns support blood sugar regulation in humans as 
well.   
 
 
  
Slide 4       
 
  
In a recent study that was small but tightly controlled, eight prediabetic men, also overweight and prehypertensive, were subjects in a 5 -week randomized crossover, controlled feeding trial. 
There was a 5 -week intervention window, with a 7 -week “washout” period in between before 
the eight men switched their eating patterns  for another 5 -week intervention window. In the 
first five weeks, the men were limited to a 6 -hour time frame of eating, with dinner consumed 
by 3 p.m. each day. After a 7 -week break, they  were allowed meals over a 12 -hour time frame 
for five weeks. The staff controlling this study oversaw all meals and ensured that the food and caloric intake remained identical between the two study arms.  
 After both 5 -week periods were completed, no weight loss occurred, but several dramatic 
improvements were seen during the early 6 -hour eating pattern. Insulin sensitivity greatly 
improved, and pancreatic beta -cell function showed significant improvements. The participants 
also reported subjectively that the early TRE greatly reduced hunger and cravings in the 
evenings. The study also showed that early time -restricted eating results in lasting beneficial 
effects even after being discontinued.    
  
While this study produced some encouraging results, a mere 6 -hour eating window may be 
difficult to adhere to for many individuals , and it is unclear what impacts this level of restriction 
could have  on other aspects of health  in the long term .   
  
Slide  5  
  
Another study revealed that a 10 -hour eating window also produces metabolic health benefits. 
The researcher noted a very low dropout rate, suggesting that a 10 -hour eating window is 
feasible and realistic for most individuals to adhere to, and can still produce benefits in the long term.   
  
The study included 19 adult participants. 13 men and 6 women, who were diagnosed with metabolic syndrome. Before the study, all participants normally consumed their meals over 14 hours or longer, and the majority were on at least one medication. Participan ts did not skip 
breakfast or dinner and were able to self- select their meal pattern under the rule that meals 
must fall under a 10 -hour window, followed by a 14 -hour daily fast. This pattern of eating was 
followed 5 days per week for 12 weeks. The majority  of participants chose to delay breakfast 
and advance dinner to an earlier time with the average breakfast (first meal) falling between 8 -
10 a.m. and dinner (or last meal) falling around 6 -8 p.m.  
 
 
The time between waking up and eating was approximately 3 and a half hours and the time 
between eating dinner and going to sleep was approximately 4 hours. Each person improved in at least 1 category of metabolic syndrome. After 12 weeks, the majority of p articipants showed 
reductions in HbA1c, fasting blood glucose, and fasting insulin levels. Other participants either lost weight, decreased blood pressure, and/or improved cholesterol levels. Many of the participants were able to lower or discontinue their  medications by the end of the study. 
Another beneficial effect that resulted from the 12 -week trial was improved sleep quality. 
Overall, 16 of 19 participants experienced increased sleep satisfaction or duration at the end of the 12 weeks, demonstrating the potential effect that food intake and meal timing can have on 
sleep.   
   
Slide  6  
  
Meal Timing Takeaways:   
 
• Adopting early time -restricted eating as a dietary pattern can improve metabolic 
health, support blood sugar regulation, and potentially reduce the amount of 
medication needed for individuals with metabolic syndrome, prediabetes, or 
diabetes.    
 
• Early time -restricted  eating is a useful tool for clients who are not interested in 
or able to change the composition of their diet but are still looking for health improvements.   
 
• If your client is struggling with insulin resistance and any of the subsequent 
stages of dysglycemia, then consider evaluating their dinner time and late -night 
snacking habits. Discuss options for moving their last meal or snack to an earlier time, preferrable at least 3 -4 hrs. before bedtime. In some cases, this can even help 
reduce inflammation and improve sleep. Consider brainstorming with your clients to find ways to reduce snacking after dinner, including options like sparkling mineral water, non -calor ic herbal teas, reducing snack cues in the environment, and finding 
alternative habits that help fill the evenings with other forms of entertainment and self-care.    
 
• Consider the total eating window, and if it is over 12 hours and your client is 
experiencing metabolic health concerns, aim to reduce the feeding window gradually. Research demonstrates that eating windows from 6 -10 hours can have 
powerfully positive impacts on glycemic control and metabolic health within a 
matter of weeks.    
 
 
 
Slide  7  
 
Caffeine stimulates the release of our stress hormones, adrenaline, and cortisol.   This is one of 
the reasons it helps us feel more alert, but as know, these hormones can cause an increase in gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, resulting in increased blood  glucose as a response to 
perceived stress. Elevated cortisol levels over time can contribute to insulin resistance and 
potentially impact blood sugar regulation.   
  
We often see folks who have caffeine first thing in the morning and  skip breakfast or eat a light 
carbohydrate -based snack. The combination of these two can certainly result in a brief window 
of high energy but is often followed by a crash. Over time, it can be taxing on the HPA axis and 
even increase the likelihood and s everity of mental health issues like anxiety.    
  
One of the most powerful methods for stabilizing blood sugar in the mornings, which will have a stabilizing impact on the entire day, is to consume a more protein and fat -rich breakfast 
before / or during your daily cup. At the very least, skipping the swe eteners and adding some 
healthy fats and protein like collagen powder can help. These practices can reduce the spike in stress hormones as well as blood sugar and set you up for a much better day of blood sugar regulation.    
  
(Note: Long -term moderate consumption of coffee appears to have a protective effect against 
T2DM. The concern mentioned here is for the worsening of glycemic control and symptoms of hypoglycemia when consumed in the morning before food).    
  
Slide 8   
 As you’ve learned, stress can cause an increase in blood glucose levels by inducing insulin resistance and liberating stored sources of fuel via pathways like gluconeogenesis. In some people, stress can eventually lead to low adrenal output, which can make  someone more prone 
to hypoglycemia because they do not have the appropriate levels of stress hormones to stabilize their lower blood sugar ranges.    
  
We know that you have an entire module dedicated to understanding stress, so we won’t go into those details here. Rather, let this serve as a reminder of the importance of addressing stress when you are working with a client with blood sugar dysregulation of any kind.   
 
Slide  9   
 Here again, we know you have a full module on the importance of sleep, but I want to remind you of the importance within the context of blood sugar regulation. Many studies have shown 
that inadequate sleep duration is associated with an increase in stress hormones, a decrease in 
 
blood sugar control, difficulty with weight management, and an increased risk for the 
development of insulin resistance and diabetes.   
 
Recommendations to support quality sleep were covered in detail in the sleep module, so here 
again, this is just a reminder to cover this topic with clients who have blood sugar 
dysregulation.   
 
Slide  10   
 As we have learned, a sedentary lifestyle can contribute to blood sugar dysregulation. Being physically active, on the other hand, can help to support healthy blood sugar regulation through 
the transport and uptake of glucose into muscle tissue.    
  
While insulin is the primary mechanism that allows glucose into our cells to be used as energy, 
muscle contractions also move glucose out of the bloodstream and into the cell. This even occurs in the presence of insulin resistance through the exercise -induced translocation of 
GLUT4 transport proteins from the cytoplasm into the cell membrane where they can act as channels to allow glucose to enter the cell.    
 
Muscle tissue is very metabolically active and needs a constant supply of energy. It obtains 
much of this energy from the glucose found in the bloodstream, which is why muscle is so 
important for glucose disposal. This makes strength training uniquely beneficial for glycemic 
control, especially as loss of muscle mass and tone occurs more rapidly as we age. The 
American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) recommends that strength training be performed 
at least two times per week with 8 -12 reps per exercise for healthy adults and 10 -15 reps for 
elderly adults.    
 
Slide  11  
  
Many studies have found that high -intensity  interval training, or HIIT -style workouts , can be 
beneficial for those with t ype 2 diabetes. For example, implementing a HIIT -style treadmill 
workout can be more effective at reducing blood glucose levels than moderate -intensity 
continuous training. There are many ways to structure HITT workouts and many resources 
online, but the core ide a is that it alternates short periods of intense exercise that causes a 
strong increase in heart rate and oxygen consumption, followed by a recovery interval, and 
then repeat.  
 
Many individuals may think of HIIT as a form of exercise that includes difficult movements with 
weights, however, a bicycle, body weight exercises, or simply walking or jogging can also be 
used. This is important for clients to understand, as many people have various issues like 
personal preferences , finances , or regional access that will prevent them from using a gym.   
 
While vigorous cardiovascular exercise is beneficial for supporting and regulating blood sugar 
levels, it is often not a great place to start with clients who have been sedentary for some 
time.    
 
Studies have shown that a simple 10 -minute walk after each meal improves blood glucose 
levels1. One study looking at the effects of a single daily 30 -minute walk vs. 3 10 -minute walks 
found that the three separate 10 -minute walks following a meal produced significantly lower 
postprandial glucose response than a single 30 -minute walk each day.    
The optimal time to conduct a light bout of physical activity to support postprandial blood 
glucose response is around 30 minutes following a meal.  
   
Depending on your other professional training, recommending specific exercises or exercise 
programs may or may not be within your scope of practice, but it is within the scope of every 
Nutritional Therapy Practitioner to discuss the value of physical activity for glycemic control  and 
encourage a client to stay active and find the appropriate support system to do so. Practitioners 
can also provide some coaching around habit formation –  asking clients to identify what type of 
movement they are attracted to, what cues and systems of accountability work best for them, 
what type of resources they have access to, who might be able to help, and what they think is a 
good starting place for them.   
 
Slide  12  
  
As you’ll recall, certain toxins can contribute to blood sugar dysregulation. While not all 
environmental toxins can be avoided in our industrialized society, there are many steps a 
person can take to reduce their overall toxic burden and in particular, ex posure to chemicals 
that can impair insulin signaling and glucose metabolism. Earlier in this module, we focused on 
a handful of chemicals that have been strongly associated with impaired metabolism, including:  
 
• Bisphenol A (BPA)   
• Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs)    
• Phthalates   
• Perfluorinated Chemicals (PFCs)   
• Glyphosate   
• Arsenic & Heavy Metals   
• Air Pollution   
  
Strategies to minimize exposures and assist in the safe removal of these compounds are covered in detail in an earlier module, so we will not go over that again here. Rather, this is just 
a reminder to consider environmental factors when working with a client with blood sugar 
dysregulation. This is especially true when other foundational work with diet and lifestyle does  
not resul t in positive progress.    
 
   
Slide  13  
 
So what might a set of recommendations look like for a person whose main concern and health goal centers around supporting their blood sugar regulation? Of course, the answer to this will be highly individual, but here are a few examples to get you’re your creative clinical ideas 
started:   
 
• Diet  
• Replace quick oats with whole rolled oats in your morning oatmeal and add 1 tablespoon of collagen peptides and 1/2 cup frozen blueberries as they are cooking. Once removed from heat, top with tbsp of ground flax for added fiber and omega- 3 fatty acids. See if the berries help reduce added sweeteners. Begin 
pouring your sweetener into a spoon before pouring it on the food and limit it to one tablespoon.    
• 3 days per week, substitute the oats with a high- protein, savory breakfast. Find 
the handout attached for ideas like eggs poached over steamed broccoli and quinoa.    
• Replace fast food lunches at work that contain bread with either a taco bowl or a 
homemade packed salad with a protein. See the link provided for ideas on 
preparing salads ahead of time and some recommended menu items for local 
restaurants.     
• Begin exploring flavors of unsweetened sparkling water. A future goal is to remove all sodas from the diet, but you’ve expressed a desire to wait on attempting that goal, so consider using this time to explore some other options that you might enjoy.    
• Consume the last meal or snack of the day at least 3 hours before bed.    
  
Slide  14  
  
• Supplements/herbs   
• Take 2 capsules (300 mg) of Magnesium Glycinate each day with dinner to help 
with sleep and blood sugar balance . 
  
• Stress and Sleep   
• Aim for 5 minutes of reading a night .  
• Limit exposure to screens (TV, computer, cell phone, etc.) at least 1 hour before 
bed. To support the new habit, consider keeping your phone at least 10 ft from 
the bed.  
   
• Physical activity   
 
• Walk for 10 -15 minutes following one meal per day – optimally dinner. See if you 
can build to walking for 10 -15 minutes after both lunch and dinner if possible.    
 
• Environmental Factors    
• Review the list of high -impact swaps that I’ve provided, and select one to try out 
in the next 2 weeks.    
 
Slide  15  
 
I hope a takeaway from this example is to consider all of these different sectors of someone’s 
diet and lifestyle, not just restricting carbohydrates. By the way, this is a pretty long list of recommendations. When you are working with a real client, you will likely only select a few at a time to help your client focus their efforts and avoid overwhelm.    
  
This brings us to the close of our module on blood sugar regulation. I’m excited for you to have the joy and satisfaction that comes with helping clients find a better balance in this area of their 
lives. It really can uplift someone’s quality of life and longevity in very meaningful ways –  so go 
out there and share what you know. People need your help.      
  
     
 
References   
 
1. American College of Sports Medicine. Physical Activity Guidelines Resources. 
ACSM. Published 2022. https://www.acsm.org/education- resources/trending -topics -
resources/physical- activity -guidelines   
2. Carlson O, Martin B, Stote KS, et al. Impact of reduced meal frequency without 
caloric restriction on glucose regulation in healthy, normal- weight middle -aged men 
and women. Metabolism . 2007;56(12):1729- 1734. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2007.07.018  
3. Chaput JP, Tremblay A. Insufficient Sleep as a Contributor to Weight Gain: An 
Update. Current Obesity Reports . 2012;1(4):245 -256. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s13679- 012-0026- 7  
4. Countries ranked by Diabetes prevalence (% of population ages 20 to 79). 
Indexmundi.com. Published 2017. https://www.indexmundi.com/facts/indicators/sh.sta.diab.zs/rankings   
5. De Strijcker D, Lapauw B, Ouwens DM, et al. High -intensity  interval training is 
associated with greater impact on physical fitness, insulin sensitivity , and muscle 
 
mitochondrial content in males with overweight/obesity, as opposed to continuous 
endurance training: a randomized controlled trial. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact . 
2018;18(2):215- 226  
6. Foster C, Farland CV, Guidotti F, et al. The Effects of High Intensity Interval 
Training vs Steady State Training on Aerobic and Anaerobic Capacity. J Sports Sci Med . 2015;14(4):747 -755. Published 2015 Nov 24.   
7. Gill S, Panda S. A Smartphone App Reveals Erratic Diurnal Eating Patterns in 
Humans that Can Be Modulated for Health Benefits. Cell Metab . 2015;22(5):789 -
798. doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2015.09.005   
8. Hatori M, Vollmers C, Zarrinpar A, et al. Time -Restricted Feeding without 
Reducing Caloric Intake Prevents Metabolic Diseases in Mice Fed a High -Fat Diet. Cell 
Metabolism . 2012;15(6):848- 860. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2012.04.019   
9. Hirotsu C, Tufik S, Andersen ML. Interactions between sleep, stress, and 
metabolism: From physiological to pathological conditions. Sleep Sci . 2015;8(3):143-
152. doi:10.1016/j.slsci.2015.09.002  
10. Hutchison AT, Wittert GA, Heilbronn LK. Matching Meals to Body Clocks -Impact 
on Weight and Glucose Metabolism. Nutrients . 2017;9(3):222. Published 2017 Mar 
2. doi:10.3390/nu9030222  
11. Kerr D. Effect of Caffeine on the Recognition of and Responses to Hypoglycemia 
in Humans. Annals of Internal Medicine . 1993;119(8):799. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.7326/0003- 4819 -119-8-199310150 -00005   
12. Kessler K, Hornemann S, Petzke KJ, et al. The effect of diurnal distribution of 
carbohydrates and fat on glycaemic control in humans: a randomized controlled 
trial. Sci Rep . 2017;7:44170. Published 2017 Mar 8. doi:10.1038/srep44170  
13. Lucassen EA, Cizza G. The Hypothalamic -Pituitary -Adrenal Axis, Obesity, and 
Chronic Stress Exposure: Sleep and the HPA Axis in Obesity. Curr Obes Rep . 
2012;1(4):208- 215. doi:10.1007/s13679 -012-0028 -5  
14. Marinac CR, Sears DD, Natarajan L, Gallo LC, Breen CI, Patterson RE. Frequency 
and Circadian Timing of Eating May Influence Biomarkers of Inflammation and 
Insulin Resistance Associated with Breast Cancer Risk. PLoS One . 
2015;10(8):e0136240. Published 2015 Aug 25. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0136240   
15. Mendes R, Sousa N, Themudo -Barata JL, Reis VM. High -Intensity Interval Training 
Versus Moderate -Intensity Continuous Training in Middle -Aged and Older Patients 
with Type 2 Diabetes: A Randomized Controlled Crossover Trial of the Acute Effects of Treadmill Walking on Glycemic Control. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019;16(21):4163. Published 2019 Oct 28. doi:10.3390/ijerph16214163  
16. Reynolds AN, Mann JI, Williams S, Venn BJ. Advice to walk after meals is more 
effective for lowering postprandial glycemia in type 2 diabetes mellitus than advice 
that does not specify timing: a randomized  crossover study. Diabetologia. 
2016;59(12):2572- 2578. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125- 016-4085- 2  
 
17. Reynolds AN, Venn BJ. The Timing of Activity after Eating Affects the Glycaemic 
Response of Healthy Adults: A Randomised Controlled Trial. Nutrients . 
2018;10(11):1743. Published 2018 Nov 13. doi:10.3390/nu10111743  
18. Smith HA, Hengist A, Thomas J, et al. Glucose control upon waking is unaffected 
by hourly sleep fragmentation during the night, but is impaired by morning 
caffeinated coffee. British Journal of Nutrition. 2020;124(10):1 -7. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1017/s0007114520001865  
19. Stote KS, Baer DJ, Spears K, et al. A controlled trial of reduced meal frequency 
without caloric restriction in healthy, normal- weight, middle -aged adults. The 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition . 2007;85(4):981- 988. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/85.4.981   
20. Sutton EF, Beyl R, Early KS, Cefalu WT, Ravussin E, Peterson CM. Early Time -
Restricted Feeding Improves Insulin Sensitivity, Blood Pressure, and Oxidative Stress Even without Weight Loss in Men with Prediabetes. Cell Metabolism . 
2018;27(6):1212 -1221.e3. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2018.04.010  
21. Wilkinson MJ, Manoogian ENC, Zadourian A, et al. Ten -Hour Time -Restricted 
Eating Reduces Weight, Blood Pressure, and Atherogenic Lipids in Patients with Metabolic Syndrome. Cell Metabolism . 2020;31(1):92- 104.e5. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2019.11.004  
22. Zarrinpar A, Chaix A, Yooseph S, Panda S. Diet and Feeding Pattern Affect the 
Diurnal Dynamics of the Gut Microbiome. Cell Metabolism . 2014;20(6):1006- 1017. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2014.11.008